    The first step toward a healthier life is often the hardest one to take. The good news is you’ve already done it.
      Hi. We're glad you're here. Simply joining Prevent shows that you’re paying closer attention to your health. That's a great start.
      Over the next 16 weeks, we’ll help you establish healthy habits that can lead to weight loss and lower your risks for certain chronic diseases. From stepping on your scale, to connecting with your coach, to watching what you eat, there are several elements of Prevent that all work together to make healthy change possible.
      Lessons are one of these essential elements. Each week, a new lesson will deliver clear information and real-life advice that will help you eat better and move more. You’ll also learn how to lower stress, which will give you more energy to take care of yourself.
      We’re excited to get going. Let’s start by talking about your personal goals.
      Goal #1: Adopt healthy habits that will help you lose 7% of your current weight. In your case, that means xx pounds, or roughly xx pounds per week. --> If you’re overweight, slimming down can reduce your risk of developing certain diseases like type-2 diabetes and heart disease. In fact, studies show that the more weight you lose, the better. Lose just 5% and your risk of developing diabetes drops by 38%. Lose 10% or more and it drops by 85%.
      Goal #2: Start getting active. Over the course of this program you'll build up to about 150 minutes per week of heart-healthy physical activity (think brisk walking). You'll also be using your muscles to gain strength. We’ll work together to find activities you're comfortable with and enjoy doing, so this won’t feel like a chore. Note: Make sure to always follow your doctor's advice regarding exercise.
      Goal #3: Shift your thinking. The way you think and feel about food, exercise, sleep, and stress, has developed over many years and is deeply ingrained. As Prevent continues from week to week, you'll gain positive new views that will open the door to healthy new behaviors.
     It usually surprises people to find out that a program like this one can fight disease more effectively than a drug. Our Prevent program is modeled after a study called the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), which proved this beyond a doubt.
      People in the lifestyle program did the best — slashing their diabetes risk by an impressive 58% on average.
      Programs like Prevent are now being recommended to reduce risk for other weight-related chronic conditions, like heart disease.
      There’s one more impressive stat about the DPP lifestyle program that you should know: 75% of the people who met their first weight-loss goal, kept that weight off for three years. In comparison, only 5% of people who lose weight on traditional diets do the same.
      As you devote time to Prevent, you can do so with confidence, knowing that you’re in a program with clinically-supported benefits.
      We’ve matched you with a hand-picked group of people who we hope will become a genuine source of support for you.
      Research suggests that the more you chime in on group conversations, the better the chances you’ll reach your goals.
      Sharing with others within the program may feel awkward at first — these are people you don't know, after all — but we hope you'll quickly realize the benefits of trading thoughts, tips, and strategies related directly to Prevent.
      You and your group also have the guidance of , a health coach who will support you, motivate you, and hold you accountable. Throughout the program, you can connect with your health coach on your group homepage, by phone or text, and through private messaging.
    Getting the most out of Prevent requires that you commit to doing four things every week.
      Step on your scale every morning.
        The act of weighing in every morning is surprisingly powerful — it reminds you that you’re part of this important program, and keeps you (and your health coach) aware of your progress. It doesn’t matter if you don’t see improvement every time; that’s not expected. Slow and steady wins this race. And please keep in mind that everyone’s weight goes up or down a few pounds depending on time of day, how much water you’ve been drinking, etc. So don’t sweat small fluctuations.
      Complete one lesson per week.
       Lessons like this first one are unlocked every Sunday morning, and we ask that you read them within the week. If you do miss a lesson because life gets busy or you’re traveling, you can always go back and catch up when you have time. Participants who complete all 16 Prevent lessons lose twice as much weight as those who skip a few.
      Track your eating and activity.
       During weeks 1–4 especially, we ask that you keep track of what you eat. It’s the best way to reveal unhealthy habits and patterns. Describe your meals and snacks in detail, including cooking methods and portion sizes. Be honest — your health coach is here to help, not judge you. Ate a donut? That's okay. Just write it down. In week 5, we’ll send you a pedometer and have you begin tracking physical activity as well.
      Contribute to the group discussion.
        Posting to the group discussion board will connect you to your group. Research shows that people who have support and feel like others are depending on them are more likely to achieve their goals. What if you don't feel you need group support? Even if that's the case, consider that other people in your group might need you. Helping others can be a great motivator.
    We take privacy very seriously. Throughout the program, you and your group will face challenges and fears that may be difficult to discuss. This is a place to share your experience without fearing criticism or worrying that your personal stories will be told to others. We ask and expect that anything you share or see shared within the group will remain confidential to the group.
     Inside the kit, you’ll find your wireless scale and Daily Food Tracker, plus a measuring tape and worksheet that will help you monitor changes in your body shape as you progress through Prevent.
     If you haven't already, get started with your scale by following the instructions (see the Scale Guide included in your kit) and weighing in.
     One thing we couldn’t send in your kit, but that we highly recommend using is the free Prevent mobile app. If you carry around a smartphone or tablet, downloading the app will make tracking your food and physical activity extra convenient.
        Did you know?
         In one study, people who kept daily food logs lost 64% more weight than those  who did not keep track of their daily food intake!
      Which of these things do you always do right before getting dressed in the morning?
              How might you use your phone to remind you to weigh in? For example, could you add a message to your phone's alarm clock?
              Where could you stick a note near the shower that would remind you to weigh in?
              Where could you stick a note near your toothbrush or sink that reminds you to weigh in?
    Discovering you're at risk for conditions like diabetes and heart disease turns weight loss into something more meaningful. That's a good thing.
    Right now, you may feel pretty motivated to improve your lifestyle. Reducing the risk of developing a serious health condition and living a long healthy life can be powerful sources of inspiration. And now you have a new program and new tools to help you along, plus the support of a health coach and group of like-minded people. But, to be realistic, it's normal to want change one day, and be resistant to it the next. That's okay. You just need to be prepared for some ups and downs.
    Clearly defining some personal and meaningful reasons for prioritizing your health will help you renew your motivation when you feel it fizzling out.
   Try finishing this sentence: "I want to live healthier and longer so that..." Then go to your Progress page and input this reason at the top of the page. If you have one, upload a photo that motivates you (use the "Help & Feedback" button if you need assistance).
      One last thing we’d like to ask you do this week: Think about how you will consciously and actively fit Prevent into your daily routine.
      Will you log in first thing in the morning? During your lunch break? Every evening before bed? When you do it doesn’t matter. The key is to make time for this important habit.
      We’ll help by sending reminder emails that nudge you to weigh in and complete lessons. If that isn’t enough, consider setting an alarm on your phone or even enlisting a loved one to ask at the end of the day if you’ve checked in with Prevent.
      Share a few thoughts with your group about exactly when you’ll log in to Prevent each day.
           Weigh in daily.
           Write down your goal weight now and post it someplace visible.
           Track your daily eating habits using the Prevent mobile app, the tracker on your main group page, or the paper tracker.
		   Visit your Progress page to verify your first few weigh-ins and upload a photo of something that motivates you.
           Contribute to the group discussion. If you haven't already, visit your Prevent Group page to meet your group and introduce yourself.
    Just like supermarkets, restaurants are in the business of getting people to consume as much food as possible.
    Dining out definitely has its advantages. It allows busy parents to squeeze in more family time instead of being stuck in the kitchen cooking and doing dishes. It's a lifesaver when you forget to bring lunch to work, or realize that your fridge is a wasteland of condiments and expired dairy products. It gives you a relaxed venue for work meetings and friendly get-togethers. And it can just be a really nice ritual with your significant other. That's all okay. Whether for business, convenience, or pleasure, you can eat at restaurants and still make healthy choices — you just need to know what you're up against.
    According to the USDA, about one-third of all calories consumed by Americans now come from restaurant and fast-food dining. That means we’re eating out nearly twice as much as we did at the end of the 20th century. And unfortunately, as a habit, it can spell disaster for your health. Imagine that you are eating at a nice restaurant with a group of friends. Your server brings a basket of warm rolls and butter to your table as he takes your order. You’re hungry but you decide to “be good” and eat just one while your friends finish the rest. Although you’re practicing restraint, even one roll with butter contributes about 200 calories to your meal — mostly in fat and processed carbohydrates — and the real dining hasn’t even begun yet.
    It is definitely more difficult to control what you consume — from ingredients to cooking methods to portion size — when you are not preparing your own food. And it’s probably not news to you that most restaurant meals are higher in calories and lower in nutrients than meals made at home. Yet research shows that two in three people still significantly underestimate the number of calories in their food when eating out. In fact, a 2013 study found the average single meal at a small-chain restaurant contained over 1400 calories per meal — that’s more than half of your calorie needs for the whole day. If you order an appetizer, an entrée with side dishes, and a dessert, you could easily consume an entire day’s worth of calories, sodium, fat, and carbohydrates in just one sitting.
      Did You Know?
        Fast food has been linked to insulin resistance. A 2005 study showed that people who chose fast food restaurants more than twice a week had double the increase in insulin resistance compared to those who ate fast food less than once a week.
    In this lesson you'll learn strategies for making the smartest choice possible. Don't worry if a dining situation turns out to be less than perfect. Your goal is to eat healthfully for the rest of your life, which will include countless social events and restaurant experiences. Just be flexible and do your best!
    Headed out for a meal? Follow these guidelines to pick the right items off of the menu and prevent calorie overload.
    Dining out takes many different forms — two-hour affairs at upscale restaurants, bar food lunches with coworkers, messy family meals at diners, quick stops at food trucks. Even though these venues can be like night and day, there are strategies you can and should use whenever and wherever you happen to be eating. Taking the time to think before you order (or even get to your destination) is well worth the effort, otherwise you could easily down enough calories to cancel out a week's worth of workouts. From now on, keep these 7 tips top of mind.
        Most restaurants, big and small, have menus posted online (many fast food restaurants also include nutrition information). If you know your destination ahead of time, you can scout out the healthiest options on the menu. Can't find a single healthy item? Choose a different destination. If the menu is not online, consider calling before you go to ask about healthy dishes. Plan exactly what you will order and don’t bother looking at the menu once you arrive. That way, you won’t be tempted to make impulse decisions.
        Just as grocery shopping on an empty stomach makes it more difficult to be discerning about good choices, the same is true for dining out. Don’t show up to a restaurant or meal with a grumbling stomach. Instead, eat a small, healthy snack beforehand (like an apple or 12 almonds), or drink a large glass of water as soon as you arrive.
        Reading a menu often requires an entirely separate vocabulary from the one you use in your own kitchen. Fried foods are not always described as “fried,” but words like “pan-seared” or “tempura” mean the same thing. Descriptions of fat-filled, cream-heavy dishes often use euphemisms like “scalloped” or “alfredo.” With a little studying, you can master chef speak and avoid making the mistake of ordering foods high in calories. Or, even easier, just ask the waiter to explain in plain English how a dish is cooked.
        In a Chinese restaurant you can look for the words zheng (steamed), jum (poached), kao (roasted), or shao (barbequed) to ID the healthier fare. In an Italian restaurant, choose red primavera sauces over anything creamy. If you like Mexican food, black beans and corn tortillas are a healthy option.
        If just about every option comes fried or drenched in butter, consider asking if the main course you want can be cooked in a healthier way. You might even want to inquire about healthier options that you don’t see on the menu. It’s sometimes possible for a restaurant to use the ingredients they already have on hand to accommodate special needs (or just smart requests).
        Order dressings, gravies, or sauces on the side rather than on your food. You can also ask for less or no cheese, even in a fast food restaurant. If you can’t get a lean cut, trimming the fat from meat at the table or taking the skin off of chicken are other tricks that help make your restaurant meal healthier. Be politely assertive when making healthy requests. Remember that it’s always in a server’s best interest to satisfy your needs as the customer.
        Portion sizes at restaurants are often two to four times larger than USDA recommendations, so before you order, ask how large your serving will be. Consider ordering a kid’s portion or a half portion when possible. Or skip the main course altogether. Some of the healthiest choices on the menu are often in the first few sections — appetizers, soups, salads. Try a small plates approach to your meal by selecting a couple of starters or sides. Think maybe one appetizer or soup with protein and a veggie side or salad. You can design your own balanced lower calorie meal.
        If ever there is a good opportunity to practice portion control, it’s in a restaurant. No matter what is on the table, the portion you consume is always up to you. If you do order a larger meal, aim to take half of it home. You can even ask the server to put half your meal in a to-go container before bringing it to your table so that you aren't tempted to eat past the point of satisfaction.
        Finally, be realistic about how often you go to restaurants. If it's a regular thing for you, showing restraint and following the rules above will be more essential compared to someone who only dines out once or twice a month.
        Take a moment now to search online for a menu from a few of your favorite restaurants. What are some of the healthiest options you might order next time you go there?
    Social settings add another layer of difficulty to meals away from home. Take charge and plan ahead to set yourself up for success.
    Research has shown that eating with just one other person increases the amount consumed by about 30%. Eat in a group of 10? You may eat about 90% more than you would alone. And studies show it seems to make a difference whether you’re eating in a group of friends or strangers. Perhaps being together makes friends feel like they have permission to indulge. In a recent national poll about healthy eating, American women cited social temptation as one of the largest barriers to eating healthfully at all times.
    From the looks of this research, your friends might not be your best allies when it comes to maintaining your healthy habits. But you don’t need to hole up in a closet with your salad. You can solve this social dilemma without succumbing to unhealthy temptations. Try these techniques for setting a healthy tone.
      1. Offer to pick the place.
        If it's up to you, choosing a healthy restaurant is the first step. This is probably the most important thing of all — you can't eat badly if there are only good options.
      2. Say "no, thanks" to freebies.
        When you’re at the restaurant, begin by keeping unwanted free food off the table whenever possible. Consider telling the server in advance that there’s no need to bring bread and butter or chips and dip.
      3. Order water all around.
      4. Go halfsies with someone.
        To control portion size, check with your friends before ordering to see if someone would like to split a main course. Given today's gigantic portions, you'll probably both end up with more than enough. If not, you can always order another side.
      5. Order your own healthy appetizer.
        If your group is ordering a slew of high-calorie apps to share, select your own personal side salad, a cup of fruit (even if it isn't on the appetizer menu), a cup of healthy soup, or a small shrimp cocktail with fresh lemon instead of cocktail sauce.
        When it's time to order, a good rule of thumb for setting the tone is to go first. You won't be tempted into ordering an unhealthy meal by hearing your friends' choices, and they may even wind up ordering something healthier based on your selection.
      7. Chew less and socialize more.
        When everyone's food arrives, be mindful of your pace. Chew slowly and consciously and put down your fork between bites. Eating slowly can help you avoid overeating while enjoying the atmosphere and conversation.
      8. Make your dish disappear.
        When you feel satisfied with how much you’ve eaten, ask your server to remove your plate immediately. It’s far too easy to passively graze on leftover food when it’s sitting right in front of you.
      Did You Know?
        A Dutch study showed that two women who eat together will usually eat at the same pace. The study put 70 pairs of women together to eat. After monitoring the participants, it was found that the women in each pair typically took bites of food within five seconds of one another.
      Whenever and however it feels appropriate, tell your friends about the changes you are making to avoid type 2 diabetes and heart disease. Find a way to describe your health choices that works for you and practice it. You might say “I’m eating differently right now for a program I’m really committed to”, or “Some foods don’t agree with me anymore since I’ve changed a lot of my eating habits.” Make your friends well aware of your goals so they can rally to support you in making better choices.
          Think about a food pusher you have dealt with in the past. How did they pressure you? What did you do (or not do) to overcome that pressure?
      This response will be shared on your group discussion board when you finish this lesson.
          Use your new strategies to plan ahead and choose the healthiest meal on the menu next time you eat away from home.
          Share your experience of making healthy changes with someone new in your life. Practice speaking confidently about the choices you are making and what they mean to you.
          Contribute to the group discussion.
          Continue planning for 150 minutes of cardio, work your muscles twice this week, and do your best to meet your personal step goal.
          Use the Healthy Eating Plate to plan meals and snacks.
    Harsh self-criticism and nagging doubt can undermine your efforts to get healthy.
    Telling yourself you’ll "never lose weight" is a classic example of a self-defeating negative thought. Have you ever looked at somebody in your life and felt like you couldn’t measure up? That's another form of negative thinking. Condemning comments you might make to yourself, like "I am always too overwhelmed to do anything about my health," "I've never been good at sports or liked exercising. That will never change," or, "I shouldn't have eaten that pizza at lunch. If I had any willpower, I would have had a salad," are both untrue and counter-productive.
    Of course you’re bound to have thoughts like these from time to time. You're human. You might become angry with yourself over something small, like eating a piece of cake, missing one of your daily walks, or oversleeping on a workday. This type of self-criticism is normal and happens to everyone. However, it can evolve into a pattern of negative thinking that has more serious effects.
    It begins with just one self-criticism. If you can quickly shake it off and regain a positive attitude, you'll soon feel better. But if that single negative notion acts as a gateway thought, lingering in your mind and opening the door for more and more self-criticism, it can lead to frustration, anger, and resentment. You may react by making more bad choices - succumbing to uncontrolled ice cream eating, a TV binge in place of your walk, too many beers, or other self-destructive behaviors, which will fuel the flame of the negative thoughts even more.
      The first step to stopping negativity is to spend some time identifying the damaging thoughts that most often come to mind for you. Let’s look at some thought patterns that are common among people who are trying to adopt a healthy lifestyle, and dig a little deeper to reveal what's at the root of them.
      Fortunately, it is your choice whether to let these harmful ideas take hold, or to return to a positive mindset. Next up: How to squash a counter-productive thought pattern the moment it starts.
        What are some negative thoughts that you tend to have about yourself? When and how do these thoughts come up?
    Become aware of negative thoughts the moment they enter your mind, so you can kick them to the curb.
    If self-criticism gets out of hand, it can become a gigantic hurdle between you and your motivation. So the sooner you intervene to stop negative thinking, the better. The first step is to recognize a harsh self-criticism when it pops into your head. Start by paying regular attention to what you are thinking and feeling about yourself. When a negative thought threatens to drag you down, commit to calling it out.
    How can you easily identify a negative thought? You may have been taught: "If you can’t say anything nice, don't say anything at all." You may not abide by that rule 100% of the time when it comes to other people (unless you're a saint), but you probably do a pretty good job. Well, you need to start showing yourself the same courtesy. One way to recognize a thought that needs to be stopped is to ask yourself whether you would make that same comment out loud to a friend. If the answer is no, chances are the thought you are having is not helpful, encouraging, or fair, and you shouldn't be saying it to yourself either.
      If you have a habit of judging yourself unfairly, it isn't likely to go away without a little work. You have to intentionally address negative thoughts each and every time they arise. On the bright side, they can be surprisingly easy to get rid of, once you put your mind to it. When you catch a self-defeating thought taking form, use one — or a few — of these strategies to quickly stamp it out.
           Try saying "Stop!" firmly to yourself as you picture a large red stop sign. It may sound silly, but just redirecting your attention to the image in your mind can be enough to put the brakes on a negative thought streak.
          Other simple words can also deter negative thoughts. You might tell yourself “No!” with the same kind of authority you would to a child or pet about to run into the street. A single clear, booming command can chase a negative thought out of your head.
          Does doing either of the above things make you feel silly? Good. If it makes you laugh, even better. A little laughter could be just what you need to nudge your thinking down a more positive path.
          Laughter really is some of the best medicine, particularly when it comes to blood sugar stability. In one study, Japanese researchers showed that laughter significantly lowered blood sugar levels for people with type 2 diabetes.
           When a quick visualization, word, or laugh doesn’t work, remind yourself of all the positive changes you have made. Negative thoughts are often untrue and represent a distorted view of a situation. See the truth by focusing on all of the positive choices you’ve made and are continuing to make. It takes a strong person to even start down this path. Give yourself a break. You’re doing a great job.
           Agree to accept and love yourself unconditionally as you are, right now, in the same way that you would love and accept a good friend or family member regardless of their flaws. Such acceptance and self-love will keep you positive and motivated to continue making healthy lifestyle choices and will help stop negative thoughts from becoming a habit. So show yourself some kindness and appreciation for having the inner strength to begin with.
    Learn healthy ways of responding to negative thoughts that will help prevent them from popping up in the future.
    Sometimes, recognizing and stopping a negative thought isn't enough to break a deeply-ingrained pattern of negative thinking. In those moments, you can battle negativity with positive self-talk. Positive thinking is just as powerful as the doom-and-gloom kind, if not more. Think of a time you were really proud of yourself. However big or small your success, pride is an amazing feeling. Perhaps it made you see yourself as stronger, smarter, or more talented than you had thought before. Positive thoughts like this can spur you on to new challenges or make difficult tasks seem doable. Harness the power of positivity to boost your success in Prevent. Here’s how to speak the language.
         Imagine that you just ate too many cookies at a party. Afterward you feel guilty and think, “I can’t believe I ate all that! I’m never going to turn my health around.” This is a normal negative thought. And while you might not feel great, there is a positive way to talk about it. Aim for words that are factual instead of comparative. Replace the negative thought about the cookies with something like: “Eating a lot of cookies works against my health goals. Next time, I can decide not to eat them. For tonight though, I’ll eat a healthy dinner.” Healthful or unhealthful, beneficial or not beneficial, and “works with my goals” or “works against my goals” are all examples of specific, factual language that can help you feel more in control and less defeated.
          When it comes to deciding on foods to eat or activities to participate in, emphasize the fact that you have choices rather than laying down strict rules that dictate your success or failure. For example, if you have a weakness for bagels, instead of focusing on why bagels are bad and how horrible you will be if you eat one, give yourself options to eat other healthy things instead. Reframe the thought with something positive like, "I am a healthy person and I choose not to eat that bagel right now." Don’t set yourself up for failure by leaving no room for error. Emphasizing choice allows for forgiveness in case of minor setbacks and creates the mental flexibility you need to succeed in meeting your long-term health goals.
          Of all of the new skills you're learning, the ability to talk yourself out of a negative thought pattern is one of the most important. By immediately challenging the unfounded beliefs that can hold you back, you'll be removing a major roadblock to success.
      Did You Know?
        A recent study of overweight women found that those who felt good about themselves lost an average of 7% of their body weight during the trial, while the group that was not emphasizing positive thinking skills lost an average of only 2% of their body weight.
      Before we move on from the topic of self-talk, let's practice responding to a counter-productive, negative thought with a helpful, positive one. Start by reading each of the the positive thinking guidelines below. Next to each, we've included an example of a related negative thought, then we've reframed that thought in a more positive way. Which of these negative thoughts are familiar to you? If you would use different words, think of that wording now. Then decide exactly how you'll phrase a positive thought to take its place.
    Your healthy lifestyle creates both inner and outer strength to help you succeed in all areas of your life.
    Your mindset can also be influenced by what you eat and how much you move. Research shows that obesity heightens your risk for depression, stress, and low self-esteem. And, interestingly, eating processed foods can directly influence your mood. According to a recent British study, a diet high in processed foods contributes to existing depression, and may even trigger bouts of depression in people who otherwise have no signs of a mood disorder.
    Research shows that poor nutrition can lead to low productivity at work, hyperactivity in both adults and children, and mood swings. When you are hungry, processed carbohydrates and other foods high in refined sugar can give you a quick energy boost, but the resulting crash and fluctuating blood sugar levels can make you feel lethargic, cranky, or agitated.
    Similarly, a diet high in whole foods that provides more fiber and nutrients for your body will keep your blood sugar levels stable and help regulate the neurotransmitters in your brain, which in turn can make you feel happier and more content. Salmon and other fish high in omega-3 fats, bananas, sunflower seeds and nuts, low-fat milk and yogurt, and asparagus and leafy green vegetables are all healthy food options that can help lift you out of a bad mood or ward off crankiness. When you fill your body with these nutrient-rich foods, it will be a lot easier to abandon negative thought patterns for positive, healthy thoughts about yourself. And, you'll be getting closer to your physical health goals at the same time.
        As you continue to make healthy lifestyle choices, what inspirational phrase or mantra might you use to help bolster your positivity and improve your outlook? Share your favorite inspirational phrase with your Prevent group.
    This response will be shared on your group discussion board when you finish this lesson.
          Practice stopping negative thoughts as soon as they pop up.
          Find three healthy foods or activities that improve your mood.
          Weigh in daily.
          Continue planning for 150 minutes of cardio, work your muscles twice this week, and do your best to meet your personal step goal.
          Use the Healthy Eating Plate to plan meals and snacks.
    Learn how to take missteps in stride, so you can quickly get back on track.
    Imagine you ate well all week, walked for 30 minutes five different times, rode your bike to do errands on a couple of days, and even tried a new fitness class one evening. Then when Saturday night rolled around, you went out for dinner with friends. And although you began with a salad as planned, you ordered an entrée on the heavier side, and you just couldn't resist eating a whole slice of cheesecake for dessert. In short, you slipped up and made unhealthy decisions when you knew what the healthy choice would have been. So what now?
    If negative thoughts begin to surface, practice your strategies from Lesson 11 for turning them around. One slip isn’t a big deal at all in the grand scheme of things. In fact, it’s a completely normal part of life. A 2014 study found most people gain weight on weekends and lose weight on weekdays, reaching their lowest weight by Friday. That’s not intended as permission to go hog wild two days a week. It just means give yourself a break. Always aim to make the healthy choice. When you don’t, remind yourself you can do it next time  and the next and the next.
        Did You Know?
          Getting discouraged and giving up after a slip is a lot worse for your health than the slip itself. A 2003 study showed that most weight-loss failure comes from people giving up on weight-loss plans after suffering a lapse in healthy eating, no matter how minor that lapse was.
      There is a big difference between a lapse  and a relapse. A lapse is a single poor choice in your healthy lifestyle, and is not a cause for alarm. A relapse is a pattern of consistent poor choices that leads you to abandon your health goals. Unfortunately, there is a link between the two: a small lapse can end up triggering more unhealthy choices. If your response to a slip-up is negative thinking, discouragement, and ultimately giving up, you may be well on your way to a full-blown backslide. So when you falter, agree to recognize your fumble and just move on. Above all, don’t hold yourself to a higher standard than you would someone else. Being too hard on yourself only sets you up for failure.
      To successfully meet your goals and maintain good health for a lifetime, you can't let an extra helping of food here or there, or one day of missed exercise undo all the hard work you are putting in the rest of the time.
            Think of a slip-up you’ve experienced during Prevent. How did you respond to it? Jot down a few ways you could have been kinder to yourself and more forgiving.
    Knowing the circumstances that typically set you up for a slip can help you spot — and sidestep — trouble.
    Hey, you're human, you're going to make mistakes. You could be nailing healthy choices for weeks at a time, only to find yourself scrambling for candy during a really busy day. Perhaps you picked up the pace with activity every day for several months and then missed three days of walks in a row because of a shift in your schedule. There are countless possible scenarios. You’re already aware of your personal environmental triggers and social cues, now let’s look at other potential hazards that impact just about everyone.
          We all handle it differently. A 2013 study found pressure sends some people directly to perusing the fridge, while for others, it completely zaps any appetite. (A third type of person is completely immune to either stress eating habit.) The research went on to show, though, that both those who overeat and those who under-eat during tense times tend to make up for it when the stress eases up. The problem is if it doesn’t. If you tend toward turning to food for comfort when you’re stressed, anxious, or nervous, make a point of having healthy snacks on hand during times of high stress so you won’t be able to do much damage.
          Oh, you don’t say? Hoofing it in a blizzard or 100% humidity doesn’t appeal to you? When inclement weather wears on your motivation to move, you need to have a backup plan. Is there a community center or school with an indoor track in your area? How about a mall? Could you invest in a treadmill or a gym membership? If you make a decision ahead of time for what you’ll do in bad weather, you’ll be less likely to fumble when the moment comes.
          A 2014 study found alcohol can be even harder for dieters to resist than sweets. And while a drink or two is OK, it can make it harder for you to use good judgment about what you should or shouldn’t eat. To avoid buzz-induced binges, don’t drink on an empty stomach.
          While allowing yourself to get truly hungry and tuning in to your body’s cues is a good thing, skipping meals or going too long between them can be a bad one. When you get too hungry, you’re more likely to overeat and be less discriminating about what you consume. You also may be prone to blow off exercise if you’re running on empty. Plan ahead by keeping healthy snacks handy for times when a long wait between meals is beyond your control.
  There are many more universal factors that can make staying healthy more difficult, ranging from problematic personal relationships to money troubles to starting a new job. What's important is that you recognize and accept them as challenging for anyone (not just you), and take what steps you can to prevent them from diverting all of your attention away from your health.
    About to cave to a craving? Already a few cookies down the hatch? There's still time to take control.
    When you have a craving for junk food that you simply can’t ignore and you know you’re about to go off your healthy diet, try these four smart and surprising strategies to minimize the damage. It could mean the difference between two cookies and twenty, or one slice of pizza and the whole pie.
          A 2013 study found that people eat less when they remind themselves of what they’ve already eaten earlier in the day. Have a hankering for French fries? Fine. But before you give in completely, use your food tracker to review what you've eaten earlier that day — and for the past couple of days — and consider how many fries you really want to eat. If you've been on a healthy streak, do you want to end it now? If you've already indulged on a few occasions, would it be wise to supersize those fries or just savor one or two?
          Turns out, patience is a powerful weapon when it comes to killing a craving. Research shows it can pay to take one bite of the food you’re craving and wait 15 minutes. In the study after 15 minutes, people who had just one or two bites of chocolate, pie, or potato chips were just as satisfied as those who had been able to eat all they wanted. When you feel like you can’t fight a craving, stop trying. Take one bite and set a timer for 15 minutes. See what happens.
          Choose foods with built-in visual cues to remind you how much you’ve eaten. Research shows people will eat as much as 22% less of foods like chicken wings when the bones are left right in front of them on the table. If you’re craving a big meal, focus on foods that leave a reminder behind — bone-in chicken or pork chops,shrimp with the tails still attached, clams, or mussels. For snacks, think pistachios in their shell, individually wrapped mini-cheeses, or fruit with a peel, pit, or core.
          Some of those same foods that leave a mess behind also help you eat less by slowing you down. If you have to shell the pistachios, you won’t be able to pop them into your mouth a handful at a time. Same goes for the chocolates, crab, lobster, mussels, olives, and so on. Look for interactive foods, or those that take some time and energy to eat.
  Mine your own personal experience to discover more craving-control strategies. Which snacks or foods are difficult for you to overindulge in? If you have a huge hankering for high-calorie Mexican or Chinese fast food, does ordering something extra spicy usually slow you down? If it is quantity you're craving, is it tougher for you to binge on sushi? Can you never make it more than halfway through a steak? Use that knowledge to your advantage!
    Bouncing back quickly is the best way to make sure a small slip doesn't become a big deal.
    Knowing exactly what you'll do after giving in to an unhealthy craving or letting a bad situation get the best of you is a great way to make sure you treat each slip as nothing more than a minor setback. Step one: immediately do something positive, which will prevent your lapse from snowballing into a relapse. Take a moment to come up with a list of healthy actions that you could take immediately after getting off track. Here are five to get you started.
      1. Make your next snack or meal uber-healthy. Opt for a piece of whole fruit before your next meal, or plan on a perfectly balanced lunch or dinner with plenty of colorful veggies.
      2. Get some quick exercise. Go for a brisk walk to burn off some calories, boost your mood, and reset your healthy attitude.
      4. Talk to someone supportive. Call a supportive friend right away, send a message to your health coach, or share on your Prevent group’s conversation board to unburden yourself of any guilty feelings.
      5. Review all the progress you have made. You are making lifelong changes, and slips are part of the process. Focus on what you’ve done well. It almost always outweighs the bad.
    Take your plan one step further by thinking about how this slip could potentially lead to others. Is that food truck that caused you to cave in the first place going to be there every day for the next month? Did you slip because a new friend is a foodie who invited you to a decadent dinner, and will want you to join her again? Write down these possibilities, and start thinking now about how you’ll act in each situation to make your health a priority. It’s always in your best interest to be prepared.
        In comparing the results of 129 studies, human behavioral experts found that when people develop positive attitudes and believe in their own ability to succeed, they are more likely and able to significantly change their behaviors for the better.
        Turning to a supportive friend, family member, or coworker when you slip up can get you right back on track. Who will you turn to when you need support? And why? Share your thoughts with your group to help everyone come up with their own list of people for support.
    This response will be shared on your group discussion board when you finish this lesson.
          Pay attention to any slips you experience, stopping to review how and why they may have happened.
          Reflect on how well your action plans work for you. Make a note of any changes you might make to improve them.
          Continue planning for 150 minutes of cardio, work your muscles twice this week, and do your best to meet your personal step goal.
          Use the Healthy Eating Plate to plan meals and snacks.
    Breathe new life into your activity routine to keep things interesting and continue moving steadily toward your weight goal.
    No matter how much you love an activity, whether it’s jogging, hiking, tennis, yoga, or lifting weights, your passion is bound to falter if it’s the only activity you do day in and day out. Even taking the same brisk morning stroll through your neighborhood can begin to feel blah. When you are building and maintaining healthy habits, boredom can be a big problem. The solution is to constantly renew your enthusiasm for staying active — not just through this final phase of Prevent, but for the rest of your life. Here are four strategies for doing exactly that.
          If you’ve gotten into a habit of walking for a half-hour every day at the same time, 5 p.m., say, that’s fantastic. Switching things up shouldn’t be so hard for you. How about going for a bike ride or strapping on some roller blades (don't forget your wrist guards) at the same time instead? The important thing is to provide yourself with a variety of activity options to choose from, and to continue adding activities that are new to you.
          If you usually walk out of your house and head off on the same route, consider starting in a different direction or changing your route to incorporate new streets. Or, if you can spare a few extra minutes, drive to a nearby trail or park. Research shows walking in nature provides special stress-busting benefits that you don’t get in the middle of a bustling city or burb. So mix it up.
          It’s been two months since you started walking regularly. Hurray for getting this far! Now consider how you might kick things up a notch by adding faster intervals to your walks (try walking for 3 minutes, then jogging for 1, then repeat). Studies suggest that interval training may be more successful for weight loss than sticking to the same pace.
          If you’re a person who is motivated by simple rewards, why not give yourself something to work toward? Think about incorporating free non-food rewards to keep yourself stimulated. Maybe a beautiful view at the end of a trail, or granting yourself 30 minutes of solitude to soak in the bathtub when you get back home. Ask friends and family members to help you reach your fitness goals by enticing you with rewards. For example, maybe your spouse could agree to prepare a special Saturday dinner for you on weeks when you never miss a workout.
    While you do want to make things fun and interesting so that you stay motivated, you don't want to mess with a great habit. That's why continuing to do your daily activity at the same time is a good idea, as is making relatively small changes (roller blading instead of walking, or biking instead of roller blading) that don't require you to completely reinvent your routine. When incorporating something totally new (for example, driving to a local pool for a swim, when you usually walk near your house) try it on the weekend when you have time to figure out what to put in your bag, how to get a locker etc. Why? If a workout seems stressful, you're more likely to skip it, so be sure to wait until a new activity is comfortable for you before relying on it as your primary workout.
        Think about your current activity routine. What aspect of it could use a little livening up? How could you make it more interesting without disrupting a solid habit?
    Improving your fitness level requires bumping up intensity and increasing your heart rate.
    Do you remember what it felt like to play tag as a kid? Those short bursts of intense running as you chased after a friend really got your heart pumping! Do you think you'd be able to keep up in a game of tag now? Walking 20 minutes a day at a brisk pace is good for you, and it was a great way to start getting active during Prevent. But as you feel yourself getting stronger, it's time to pick up the pace.
    Aerobic fitness is about endurance, or your body's ability to sustain work for extended periods of time. The 'work' being relatively moderate levels of exercise that use oxygen to supply your body’s energy needs. The higher your level of aerobic fitness, the easier it is for your heart to pump oxygenated blood through your body. As you increase the intensity of your activity, you will begin feeling a difference in your body. With a stronger heart, it will be easier to do things like walk up stairs while carrying groceries or sprint between the door and your car when it's pouring rain.
    To improve your aerobic fitness, begin to really pay attention to how hard you are working, not just how many minutes of movement you put in. Increasing your level of fitness has many advantages. Studies have found that regular aerobic exercise can reduce the risk of heart attack by a third and help you live longer. Aerobic fitness is also particularly important for people at risk for type 2 diabetes or heart disease because it has been shown to improve vascular reactivity, or the rate at which blood flows through your arteries. This is important because dysfunctions related to vascular reactivity are often a concern for at-risk individuals, leading to issues like strokes and heart attacks. Fortunately, aerobic exercise can help you improve vascular reactivity and avoid diabetes and heart disease at the same time!
      Did You Know?
        A study conducted by the University of Pennsylvania found that, for people with prediabetes, every 2,000 calories burned per week through exercise reduced their risk of developing type 2 diabetes by 24%.
          Are you feeling up for the challenge of pushing yourself a bit harder during exercise? If not, what factors (mental or physical) might be putting a damper on your enthusiasm?
    Following these principles will help you get more heart-boosting benefits from your workout.
    To truly impact your heart health and aerobic fitness, there are a few key factors that can guide your activity choices. We call these factors FITT: Frequency, Intensity, Time, and Type. FITT accounts for how often you are aerobically active (Frequency), how hard you work when you are active (Intensity), how long you are active (Time), and the kind of activity you do (Type). Considering these factors will help you work your heart and increase your aerobic fitness slowly and safely. Use the list below to learn more about how to incorporate FITT into your routine. As you read, think about how you may already be incorporating some of these principles.
          Choose to be active most days. We suggest being active at least three days a week, but five to seven days is even better. Increase your frequency slowly, and if two days in a row of activity is new to you, vary your intensity, time, and type so that you don’t overdo it.
          While you’re active, you should breathe fast enough to be able to talk comfortably but not sing. If you can sing without any trouble, you should up your intensity. If you have trouble breathing and talking, slow down (we'll help you judge and adjust your intensity level more closely on the next page).
          Stay active for at least 10 minutes at a time. If you’re already comfortable with 20-minute activity periods, get in the habit of increasing your time by several minutes whenever your workout starts to feel a little too comfortable.
          A variety of activity types can increase your aerobic fitness. Any intense activity that uses large muscles, such as arms and legs, will make your heart beat faster. For a basic way to begin, simply walk faster than you normally would. Then, branch out into swimming, jogging, sports, or aerobic fitness classes.
      Did You Know?
          On average, a sedentary person’s heart will beat about 70-75 times a minute. An active person with a good level of aerobic fitness will pump the same amount of blood through their heart in just 50 beats per minute.
      It can be hard to tell if you're exercising at the right level of intensity. Use this guide below to ramp up your aerobic fitness level at a rate that's challenging - without going too far.
    Short-term goals can keep you on track toward long-term ones, boosting your motivation along the way.
    You are already working toward several goals in Prevent: being active for 150 minutes per week, increasing the intensity of your exercise, eating healthier fats and fewer refined carbs, and losing 7% of your body weight. To make those big goals more attainable, try slicing and dicing them into smaller parts. Research shows that people are more likely to meet their longer-term goals when they set mini goals along the way. Consider checking in with your group to see if anyone would like to join you in setting and reaching a mini goal. Here are a few ideas to consider.
          A race doesn’t have to mean running. Signing up for a 5K is a great motivator to increase your speed, walking or running. If you have a friend, family member, or walking buddy who you can convince to do it with you, even better. If not, see if you can get someone else in your Prevent group to sign up for one in their area so you can at least have a virtual training buddy. Ask  for tips on how to train.
          As you may have noticed, your body can quickly get used to an exercise routine. Walking 30 minutes may have been a battle a couple of months ago, but probably isn't so tough anymore. Surprising your body by asking something different from it all the time is one of the best ways to increase fitness. Try adding 10% more walking each week. That’s just an extra 15 minutes total this week, an extra 16 minutes next week, and an extra 18 minutes the following week.
          Is there a really big hill in your city or town, or even a long set of stairs (maybe in a local stadium?) that would be a struggle for you to climb at a brisk pace without stopping? Make it your goal to go just a little bit further each day before stopping to rest, until you can make it all the way to the top without a break.
    To make sure that you don't overdo it, and thereby increase your chance of injury, keep the intensity chart on the previous page in mind. If at any point you're breathing so hard that you can't catch your breath or talk, decrease your effort immediately.
        How will you kick your fitness up a notch this month? Can you make a pact with someone else in your group to support each other through training for a 5K, or to start jogging a couple of times a week? What will your goals be, and how can you hold each other accountable for reaching them?
    This response will be shared on your group discussion board when you finish this lesson.
          Try a new physical activity to add variety to your routine. Review Lesson 6 or talk to your health coach for ideas.
          Focus on increasing the intensity of your walks and other activities.
          Evaluate your progress toward fitness goals, and set a new fitness goal for the final four weeks of Prevent.
          Weigh in daily.
          Continue planning for 150 minutes of cardio, work your muscles twice this week, and do your best to meet your personal step goal.
          Use the Healthy Eating Plate to plan meals and snacks.
    Social factors can impact your healthy habits for better — and for worse.
    We’ve already talked about how different aspects of your environment can trigger either healthy or unhealthy choices. Certain people and social situations can have the same effect. These "social cues" can arise during your interactions with anyone: family, friends, neighbors, coworkers, restaurant staff, or even your Prevent group. How you respond to social cues usually depends on the source and on the types of habits you have formed around those people. Social cues can either be problematic, like subtle pressure in the lunchroom to snack on chips, or helpful, like regular encouragement from an active friend to go on weekend hikes.
        Have you ever wondered when and how you developed your responses to social cues? A new study shows that peer pressure is a major factor in why children choose to eat certain snack foods instead of others.
      Did You Know?
    As with environmental triggers, over time, your repeated response to a particular cue will build a habit. And while any habit is hard to change, habits formed through social cues can be particularly stubborn, because they involve other people's actions and emotions. For example, suppose your partner is in the habit of bringing home a pint of ice cream for you every Friday evening. Even though the gesture is sweet, it fuels the kind of unhealthy eating habit that you're trying to break.
    You have already learned that identifying a cue requires noticing an action, then working backward to find out what first triggered it. As you examine the social cues in your life, don't forget that it takes time to break an old habit and to build a new one. To jumpstart the process, communicate with your friends and family by letting them know what you are trying to change. Point out that a particular social cue makes it difficult for you to stay on course with your healthy lifestyle. Stay positive and think of each social interaction as an opportunity to learn more about the social cues and responses that work well for you. Over time, it will become easier to spot these triggers, and practice will make you better at handling them.
        Think about the social interactions you have on a regular basis. Is there anyone in your life who tends to trigger unhealthy behavior?
    Defuse social cues by either addressing them directly, or changing your reaction.
    The simplest way to avoid the trigger of a negative social cue is to stay away from it, but avoidance isn't always an option. When you can’t sidestep a social cue, try to change it, or come up with a healthy way to respond.
    The simplest response to social cues that involve unhealthy food is to say “No, thank you,” in a polite but firm manner. To make your message even more effective (and prevent any hurt feelings), follow up your refusal with a suggestion of something that the other person can do for you instead, such as "No, thanks, I don’t want any soda. I would love a glass of water, though.” This type of suggestion allows the other person to feel generous and helpful, while at the same time ensuring that you don’t feel obligated to indulge in any unhealthy behaviors. Let’s look at some other social cues that come up often, and how you can tailor your response for the best results.
      Another wise way of successfully managing social cues is to increase your exposure to positive ones. Do that, and there soon won't be much time in your schedule for negative ones. Think about the people who cross your path on a daily basis. Which of those individuals typically make the healthiest choices?
      Take note, and consider how you can let your interactions with them trigger healthy choices for you. Maybe one of your coworkers is always creating new and interesting salad mixes for lunch. Make a point of asking her what her latest combo is, or suggest you grab lunch together one day. If one of your friends loves to spend Sunday afternoons exploring new fitness classes or discovering nearby hikes, text her to find out what she's up to, either just to get ideas or to see if you can tag along. Spending time with people who are already physically active and who enjoy making healthy food choices will bring with it a variety of positive social cues. They can keep you inspired and help you stay on track with your own health goals.
          Of the people you know, who do you see making healthy choices on a regular basis? How might you find ways to interact with them more often or tap them for ideas and inspiration?
      Let's create a positive action plan to help you face unhealthy social cues, and begin adding more helpful ones to your routine. To get started, think about just one social cue that is a problem for you.
       Finally, think of roadblocks that are likely to come up for you as you implement these actions, and note a few ways you might overcome them.
    Social cues are especially powerful at special events like parties or weddings. Anticipate the challenges and plan ahead.
    How do your habits and routines change when you go on vacation or have guests in your home? Holidays, birthdays, parties, weddings, and vacations all pose a challenge when you are dealing with lifestyle changes. The food and social cues on special occasions are usually different than those you handle on a regular basis, and can upset your routine, bringing out strong, unhealthy habits that have formed over many years.
    While it may be harder to control your environment on a special occasion, you can still stay away from unhealthy cues and incorporate positive ones. Parties and holidays are the perfect opportunity to practice responding to social cues in healthy ways, including politely saying "No, thank you." Try using one or two of these strategies, depending on the situation.
          Just like you should never go grocery shopping on an empty stomach, you shouldn't head to a special event without first filling up your stomach with satisfying, fiber-rich whole foods.
          Try putting physical distance between yourself and your problem cue. For example, at a party you may choose to stand as far away from the food table as you can so that you won’t be tempted to mindlessly nibble.
          Grab a glass of water or tea when hors d'oeuvres are circulating, or when other guests are eating and you aren’t truly hungry.
          For dinner parties or potlucks, bring a healthy dish to share with others (or just have yourself, if no one else is interested). That way you can be sure there will be at least one choice you can feel good about eating.
          If you absolutely have to partake in wedding or birthday cake or some other special treat, share it with a friend or take just a small portion to keep from overindulging.
          Do you have a birthday, vacation, or other special event coming up in the near future? Tell your group how you plan to overcome the negative social cues that are sure to pop up.
      This response will be shared on your group discussion board when you finish this lesson.
    Rally support for your healthy habits from the people around you.
    It isn't always easy to stay on course while making lifestyle changes, and you'll probably find that support from the people around you is vital. Unfortunately, these very people can also unintentionally present negative triggers in your life. By letting other people share in the healthy changes you’re making, they’ll be more likely to support you, reinforce the positive cues you’re setting up, and become aware of the ways they might help or hinder your efforts. A social support system can keep you accountable during moments of weakness and remind you of all that you are working toward. Supportive people will be proud of your changes, strengthening your own commitment to health.
          Talk to the people you live with to build support at home. These people can be your day-to-day cheerleaders, encouraging you through hard times and helping you celebrate milestones. Involve them in cleaning out the kitchen and coming up with solutions to keep unwanted food out of sight even if they still want them in the house.
          Share healthy meals together, introduce new fruits and vegetables, and show off your good food habits to rally excitement about eating well on the home front. Instead of sitting and watching TV together, join children for activities like charades or a game of tag in the yard as your fitness level improves. Keeping your household involved as you become healthier will ultimately create better habits for everyone.
          Connect with colleagues to see if anyone wants to join in a daily walk during your break. If your office supplies donuts or bagels at breakfast, bring in a fruit plate, or ask your boss if the company would add healthier options to the spread. If you normally eat lunch with a coworker, pack nutritious meals to share, or ask them to join you in your new soup-and-salad habit if you go out.
          If you have a long-term physical activity goal in mind, such as running or walking a 5K, see if you can generate interest from coworkers to train with you. The more people who are aware of your commitment, the harder it will be for you to sneak off to the vending machines in a moment of stress.
          Friends can be wonderfully supportive as you build a healthier and more active lifestyle. By sharing in your transition, they might even decide to adopt healthier habits themselves. Exchange recipes with friends and share ideas with one another for cooking and eating well at home. Set an example with your own potluck party — pick healthy food themes and give awards for the best-tasting items.
          Ask for your friends’ support in steering clear of desserts when you go out to eat. Look for healthy ways to hang out: Check out healthy new restaurants, sign up for cooking classes, consider participating in a walk for charity, or look for a group bicycle tour. If you and your friends like to travel together, make your getaway weekend active!
        Did You Know?
          Good health and weight loss have far-reaching effects. Research has shown that when one person loses weight, their close friends and family are more likely to shed unwanted pounds as well.
      You’ve probably already been talking about Prevent with your partner, children, or other close family members, but learning about social cues is a great excuse to set up a deeper conversation about how these important people can provide support for your efforts and participation in the program. If a family member is struggling with some of the changes you are making because they impact the relationship between the two of you, share all the positive ways that that particular change has affected your energy, your mood, and your health. For more helpful strategies for dealing with a less-than-supportive family member or friend, read this great blog post by a Prevent Health Coach. And, don't forget to remind the people close to you of the most important thing of all: The changes you are making will ultimately reduce your risk of developing a life-threatening disease.
          Create a plan to address problem social cues and incorporate helpful ones.
          Test out healthy responses to your existing social cues and keep planning until you find a solution that works for you.
          Rally support for your healthy lifestyle changes from new friends and old. Set up a few frank conversations with your family and friends about social cues that you want to improve.
          Weigh in daily.
          Continue planning for 150 minutes of cardio, work your muscles twice this week, and do your best to meet your personal step goal.
          Use the Healthy Eating Plate to plan meals and snacks.
    Stress affects more than just your emotional reactions. Understand the serious negative impact it has on your body and your health.
    Maybe you’re running late and stuck in horrible traffic, or trying to plan a personal event while overloaded at work, or worried about ongoing money troubles... Suddenly it all feels like too much and you start to come undone. When life gets overwhelming, it translates to major stress — something most of us are all too familiar with. A 2013 survey found the average adult reports a level of stress higher than what they consider to be healthy.
    You know what stress does to your mind (it makes you scatterbrained, frustrated, negative), but what about to your body? Some physical signs of stress are hard to ignore. You might experience a nagging headache, racing heart, shallow breathing, stiffness and tension in the neck or back, or uncomfortable warmth and sweating. Well, that's just the tip of the iceberg. The full scope of how stress impacts your body is far less obvious. Let's take a closer look...
        Did You Know?
          Studies show that inhaling the scent of certain essential oils like lavender, chamomile, rose, and bergamot promotes relaxation and stress relief. These herbs contain linalool, a chemical compound proven to reduce stress in lab mice.
    This  response is key when facing imminent danger (e.g., a grizzly bear attack), but modern-day, stress tends to be less life-threatening and a lot more routine. Instead of experiencing short bursts of intense stress, your body may stay in this stressed-out mode for long periods of time. This prolonged stress mode not only affects your blood sugar levels, but also contributes to subtle inflammation that doctors believe is linked to several diseases, including diabetes. As a person at risk for chronic disease, it is especially important to handle your stress in healthy ways. To get started, you need to begin identifying sources of stress in your life.
    Pinpoint the sources of stress in your life and work toward minimizing them whenever possible.
    Some stress is simply unavoidable — illness or death in your family, new work pressures, unexpected expenses for necessary home repairs, the list goes on and on. But as you think about the sources of stress in your own life, recognize that some stressors come from situations, decisions, or people that you can choose to avoid.
    Think about the people you encounter on a regular basis. Who among them initiates stress for you? A coworker, a particular friend or neighbor, your mother? It’s okay to admit that a person you know, even a person you love, is a stressor in your life. On the other hand, it’s also good to take note of the people who help you feel more balanced and calm. If you have friends or family members who reduce stress for you, remember that, and turn to them when you feel your internal temperature rising.
    Many of the other avoidable stressors in life have to do with the decisions you make. Showing up to an important meeting unprepared, taking on too many responsibilities at once, or volunteering to be a part of something you aren't really passionate about, are all examples of avoidable stressors. When it comes to preventable stress, the most healthy response is to avoid it in the first place. Below are seven ways you might do that.
    Too often, we agree to do something with or for others out of a false sense of obligation, or because we are natural people-pleasers. In this busy day and age, everyone understands when you just can't fit anything more into your schedule. Start saying “no,” and you'll quickly realize that most people won't mind. Commit to only saying “yes” when something is important to you.
    It's not just for high-level execs. When a project at work or at home is so big that it's causing you stress, find ways to spread the work around. Let your boss know that you need to delegate part of your assignment (or offload another one), or give family members specific tasks that will make things easier for you. The idea that you have to do everything yourself is self-defeating and simply untrue.
    Goals are incredibly positive tools — unless you take on too many at once, or they are so far out of reach that just thinking about them makes you feel overwhelmed. It's especially important when you're involved in a time-consuming program like this one that you only set additional goals that are well thought-out, and that you can realistically achieve.
   At some point during every weekend, take a little time to consider your week ahead and make a mental note of the people or events that could raise your stress levels. Apply the problem-solving skills you learned in Lesson 9 to each potential stressor: Describe it in detail, brainstorm solution options, make an action plan, and put it to the test.
    If you don't use a daily calendar, start now. Block out time to do the things you really need — and want — to get done. Having an organized schedule will reduce stress by helping you to feel more in control of your life.
    Whenever you're struck by a stress attack, do your best to step back and think about whether the issue you're anxious about will matter next week, next month, or next year. By reminding yourself of the big picture, you can often stop sweating the small stuff.
    Do your very best to sleep for seven hours each night, the amount of time research has shown to be most restorative. Being tired makes everything seem more stressful.
        The first step to preventing stress is awareness. What person, situation, or decision in your life has caused you stress recently or on a regular basis? Could you have avoided any of that stress using the strategies above?
    It takes practice to calm your mind. Use proven methods of stress reduction to ease tension and enhance your health.
    While you can't always prevent or avoid stress, there are many methods you can use to cope with it in a healthy way. The trick is being aware of the physical signs that indicate stress for you — maybe sweating, a headache, irritability, or anger. Those are your signals that it’s time to stop what you’re doing and address your stress.
        Even if you are faking it, simply putting a smile on your face can help. Research has shown that this small physical act promotes chemical changes in your body associated with happiness, which helps reduce your stress response.
        Pausing to think about someone you love or something that makes you happy can help restore your perspective and balance. Close your eyes and visualize that person, thing, or place in detail.
        Petting a cat or dog can actually trigger your body to release mood-boosting chemicals in your brain. So go out of your way to give your dog some love or pet a neighborhood pooch when you're feeling frazzled.
        Head out for a walk around the block and practice breathing slowly through your nose. Try not to think about anything but the air going in and out of your lungs.
        Music can be a powerful tool to help redirect your mood. Whether it’s classic jazz, top 40 hits, or hardcore punk, the music you love can distract you from stress and, studies show, calm your nerves.
      Knowing a handful of stress-reducing techniques can certainly help you chill out on the spot, but the key to reducing your overall stress level is not knowledge, but practice. It takes skill to calm your mind, so don’t expect all stress to melt away the first few times you try one of the tips on the previous page. The deeper your commitment to practicing relaxation, the better and faster stress-relieving strategies will work for you. For example, a few minutes of stretching can help you relax your body, but making stretching into a regular routine can help you maintain a relaxed state of mind more of the time. Get into the habit of practicing stress-reducing methods regularly for best results.
      The good news is that you're already practicing a very important one: exercise. It may not always feel relaxing at the time, but moving your muscles is one of the most effective ways to relieve stress. You already know that being active helps boost weight loss, energy, and mood, so it makes sense that going for a bike ride, walk, dance, or doing any other activity you enjoy can also help you reduce tension. While all physical activity can work, some doctors and studies suggest that the consistent, repetitive motions involved in activities like walking or swimming can alleviate stress especially well.
        Did You Know?
          Research shows that meditation can lower blood pressure and cortisol levels, and can also increase the thickness of regions of the brain associated with focus, working memory, and reading ability.
      Other highly-effective habits for stress-reduction require making regular time in your schedule (every day is ideal, but aim for three times a week to start) to sit or lie quietly and focus on letting go of tension and troubling thoughts. Consider trying one of these three methods.
      Progressive relaxation has been shown to block the chemical effects of stress on the body. To do it you’ll need a place to lie down or sit comfortably and 20 to 30 minutes of time. Once you are comfortable, close your eyes and relax all the muscles in your body as best as you can. Then, clench the muscles in your right foot as strongly as you can for about 10 seconds before releasing them completely. Do the same with your left foot and then continue to work through all your muscle groups in this way until you reach the top of your head. Try it on your own or by following along to this free 30-minute guided audio exercise from Dartmouth College.
      Visualization is one of the easiest and most enjoyable forms of meditation: simply close your eyes and picture yourself in a beautiful, serene setting. Even 5 to 10 minutes of visualizing in this way can relieve tension. As you sit with your eyes closed, picture everything about the perfect environment you have created, from the colors of the sky, to the texture of the ground, to the scent on the breeze and the temperature of the air. Try it on your own or by following this free 6-minute guided meditation from Dartmouth College.
      Focused breathing meditation can help relieve tension in just a few minutes. And, according to a study from Duke University, it can also help stabilize blood sugar levels long-term when practiced for extended periods every day. To try it, sit quietly for a few minutes in a place where your feet are on the floor and your back is supported. Close your eyes and inhale slowly, feeling your breath come in through your nose and mouth and expanding your abdomen. At the top of your inhale, pause for a second or two, then slowly and deeply exhale. If your mind wanders, bring your attention back to your breath. Try it on your own or by following along to this free 11-minute guided meditation, also from Dartmouth College.
          Which person, thing, experience, or location can become your go-to 'happy place' that you focus on when things get stressful?
    Spell out exactly how you'll incorporate stress-reducing habits into your life.
    What has been your typical response to stress in the past? Maybe you usually overeat, have a few drinks, or just withdraw and sack out on the couch. Don’t let these unhealthy reactions interfere with the positive lifestyle changes you are making. Use what you’ve learned in this lesson to create a personal action plan in which you make it clear how you will react to stress in the future. Follow these three steps.
      Step 1: Think about the unavoidable situations that create stress for you, and remember how you feel when you are stressed out. What do you do differently when you get stressed? How do you typically cope, and does it work?
      Step 2: Look over this lesson, decide which methods for dealing with stress might work best for you and make a list of them. Remember that practice makes perfect, so try each chosen strategy several times before giving up on it.
      Step 3: Create an action plan for preventing stress in the first place. First, identify a stressor that is within your control. Then decide what actions you can take to avoid or eliminate it. Think through all the steps that will help you follow-through on your plan, consider roadblocks that might come up, and brainstorm ways to overcome them.
      Did You Know?
        Writing in a journal can help relieve stress. A recent study found that participants who put their emotions down on paper experienced reduced anxiety and depressive symptoms.
      As you make a plan to address your stress, it can be helpful to consider where and when you already feel most relaxed. Which activities tend to leave you calm and at ease? Which people in your life inspire you slow down and stress less? Which environments have a way of draining the stress out of you the moment you walk through the door? Just as you made plans to nurture healthy cues in Lesson 14, plan to nurture relaxing ones now. For example, you might feel the least stress while tackling easy DIY projects, exploring Pinterest, texting with a friend, browsing neighborhood yard sales, or playing Scrabble with your family. How can you do what already relaxes you more often?
      Planning time in your week for relaxation can seem extravagant and even selfish when there are so many things on your to-do list, but it's important to view stress-relief as an integral part of improving your health and reducing your risk of type 2 diabetes and heart disease. Healthy doesn't always mean adjusting your diet or increasing activity. By lowering stress through relaxation, you'll feel more empowered and in control, which will make meeting your health goals far easier.
          Weight and activity are easy to measure, but stress is more difficult to quantify. How do you know when you need to slow down? What are the signs that you're getting overwhelmed?
      This response will be shared on your group discussion board when you finish this lesson.
          Choose several stress-reducing techniques to try this week. Give each method a second chance. It can take time to learn to relax.
          Use your action plans to manage major stressors in your life and evaluate your results.
          Weigh in daily.
          Contribute to the group discussion.
          Continue planning for 150 minutes of cardio, work your muscles twice this week, and do your best to meet your personal step goal.
          Focus on food tracking during these final two weeks and get your health coach's feedback on your food habits.
    You're Ready!
    Which Goals Will You Focus On Next?
    After 16 weeks in the Core program of Prevent, you're about to make a big transition.
    This lesson marks both a successful ending and an exciting beginning. Four months ago, you made a commitment to change your lifestyle for the sake of your health, and this week's graduation is proof that you are seeing that commitment through. Let us be the first to warmly congratulate you.
    We hope you have a newfound sense of confidence in your ability to make healthy choices — and in your ability to reflect and regroup after making a not-so-healthy choice. Stress, sleep, social factors, environmental cues, emotional triggers... you now understand how all of these things influence your behavior. You also have the problem-solving skills you need to achieve any realistic goal and overcome any obstacle. In other words, you're ready to move out of the high-support environment of Prevent and on to the next, more independent phase that is Sustain.
    But first, let's take a moment to look back on what you've achieved, consider your ongoing challenges, and plan your next steps.
      You've likely already met, or made considerable progress toward, many of your health goals during the Core program. Your accomplishments so far are a testament to your ability to change for the better. Of course, living a healthy lifestyle is always a work in progress. Whatever you do, don’t stop now! You have all the tools you need for success. Stay focused, apply what you’ve learned, and you will achieve more great results in Sustain and beyond.
      A simple way to keep yourself on track after graduation is to make a positive action plan that can help you meet a new health goal in the near future. Maybe you’ve been able to achieve some physical activity goals, but not all. Which one might you focus on next? Upping your intensity? Adding more variety to your workouts? If you haven't quite reached your goal weight, now is the time to tackle those final pounds. Great at shopping for healthy whole foods, but in a bit of a rut when it comes to cooking? Pledge to make at least five new meals from scratch this month. The specific goal matters less than the act of setting it, then using all of your new skills to go after it.
        Did You Know?
          A study conducted at Dominican University in California showed that people who wrote down their goals had 33% more success in achieving them than those who just thought about their goals.
          Brainstorm and write down one concrete, realistic goal that you can work toward over the next few months. What goal will you focus on, and what small steps can you take this week?
    Take time to acknowledge your accomplishments — and face ongoing challenges.
    Stop and really consider the changes you've made since your first week in Prevent. In what ways are you more physically active? What changes have you made to choose healthier foods? How have you been successful in reducing stress and negativity?
    When you think about your progress, you'll probably realize that some changes were extremely difficult, others were surprisingly easy, and that certain changes had more of an impact than others. Of all the changes you made during Prevent, which mattered the most when it came to reaching your weight loss goals? Perhaps it was a major change like switching from driving to work to commuting via bicycle that had an incredible impact on your weight loss. Or maybe it was something relatively simple — like discovering how delicious a vegetable stir fry can be — that significantly reduced your calorie intake.
    Once you've zeroed in on the most meaningful change of all, think about why and how you were able to achieve it. How exactly did you make this real, lasting change in your day-to-day life? Through examining the process that worked for you — whether it was creating a detailed plan, asking for people's support, giving yourself little rewards, and/or whatever else made it happen — you can gain priceless insight that will allow you to make new changes, overcome new challenges, and reach new goals. If you have paper and a pen, jot down every part of that successful process that you can remember.
      In each of the past 16 weeks, you've been asked to look at different aspects of your lifestyle, and make healthier choices that will help you lose weight and reduce your risk for disease. Along the way, you've no doubt come across challenges that continue to trip you up. You may have difficulty incorporating physical activity into your workweek, or perhaps you have trouble resisting unhealthy food when dining out with friends. Whatever the challenge, as always, your awareness is an important step to overcoming it.
      So take a second and think: What remains your biggest challenge when it comes to being healthy?
      Got an answer? On the previous page, we asked you to examine the change-making process that worked great for you. Now, how can you use what you've learned from making your most meaningful and successful change to help you tackle this tough one?  Which steps and strategies from that process might also work in this scenario? Pick just one or two to try this week.
      A surefire way to find out who your most valuable friends are is to ask the people in your life to support you in reaching a health goal and see who comes through. Over the past 16 weeks, who really came through for you?
      How might you give these individuals credit for helping to keep you on track, and encourage them to continue supporting you? A simple text, email, or card saying thanks would probably do the trick. What else might you do to show your appreciation and renew their enthusiasm?
      As life changes and you meet new people, stay on the lookout for more health-minded individuals in your social circle and at work who might be helpful sources of positive cues for you. It's not just a one-way street — over the past few months, you have likely become the kind of person who provides positive cues for others.
    Identify and reinforce your sources of motivation to stay on track.
    At the beginning of the Core program, you were asked to think about your motivation for wanting to lead a healthier life and respond with a short phrase and photo. Do you remember what you shared? Whatever your sources of motivation were at the beginning of the program, they helped you get started on your path towards health, and they will help you continue living a healthier lifestyle after graduation. Hold on to them and reinforce them as you enter the next phase of Prevent.
        Research on weight-loss studies has shown a direct connection between improved weight loss and a person’s ability to self-monitor and stay motivated.
    Over the course of the program, you have learned a lot about yourself and have probably become aware of additional motivators that keep you going. Whether it’s living without medication, fitting into smaller jeans, feeling happy and energized at the end of the day, or being able to go for a bike ride with your grandkids, there are countless reasons to maintain your healthy habits for the long haul. What’s most important is that you know what your personal motivations are, and that they matter a whole lot to you.
      Beyond reconnecting with what motivates you, these four simple strategies can help you maintain the progress you've made so far, achieve the new goals you set for yourself, and continue to make healthy choices throughout each day.
          Continuing to track your weight, eating, and activity will keep you committed to good health. As you transition into Sustain, keep stepping on your scale every day, and use your Progress page or mobile app to see how you're doing. Many Prevent graduates choose to also continue tracking their daily food and activity, while others will take a break, then start again when they set a new goal or notice themselves slipping. Measuring your waist or belt size once a month can also help you stay on track. Learn and do what works best for you.
          By now, you know what challenges you. Use that knowledge to your advantage by posting messages, motivational pictures, or inspirational quotes that will remind you to make good choices. Maybe it's a note stuck to your car's dashboard that says "Snack before you grocery shop!" or a photo of yourself looking happy and healthy on the front of your fridge. As you move into Sustain, you'll need to become your own personal health coach, and this is a great way to start.
          Keep adding variety to your activity routine and switching up your meals and snacks with different kinds of healthy foods. Both will keep you motivated by making sure you don’t get bored with your new lifestyle choices.
          Finally, pay attention to the circumstances and environments that inspire you to stay healthy, and soak up as much of that inspiration as you can. Playing sports, walking for charity, perfecting a new yoga pose, spending time in nature, being around kids, reading about people who overcome illness against all odds... Whatever inspires you, embrace that activity and plan to do it more often.
          What one or two places might you put a note, photo, or inspirational quote that would help remind you to resist temptation and make the healthier choice?
    Pack up all of the skills and tools you've picked up in Prevent to take with you into your long-term healthy lifestyle.
    The Sustain phase that follows graduation will help you create a lifetime of healthy habits while maintaining a strong connection to the Prevent program. During this phase, you will use what you have learned so far to help you reach health goals that you set for yourself. Sustain is similar to Core in many ways, but will guide you with a lighter touch. While you'll be communicating less with your health coach, you will still have the support of your small group and a larger community of Prevent alumni. Don't shy away from asking for help when you need it!
    You’ll keep your scale and pedometer (and can continue using your Prevent mobile app). The Core lessons will be available for you to review anytime, and you’ll learn more through a new curriculum of shorter, self-guided weekly lessons that deliver smart, simple strategies for long-term healthy living.
    As you rely less directly on your coach, it's important to find new resources for ideas and advice. Blogs, articles, videos, and books that focus on cooking with nutritious whole foods, practical fitness tips, or staying motivated and inspired, are all great examples of resources you can share with other Prevent alumni as you move forward in your journey together. Check back often to see what's new on the Prevent blog.
    We're thrilled that you've reached this important milestone, and are excited to welcome you into Sustain next week. See you there!
        What resources outside of Prevent have made a positive difference in your health? Have you read a book about healthy living, found a healthy recipe blog, used a great piece of exercise equipment, or stumbled on  advice that really helped you along? If so, share the knowledge with your group.
    This response will be shared on your group discussion board when you finish this lesson.
          Reflect on the personal sources of motivation that are most important to you and the new goals that will keep you on track during the Sustain phase.
          Take pride in all you’ve accomplished, and plan some enjoyable, healthy activities to celebrate your Core program graduation this Saturday.
          Finish the Core program on a high note by weighing in, recording what you eat every day, exercising, and striving to hit your personal step goal.
          Contribute to the group discussion often as you get ready to join the Prevent alumni community together.
    We don't need an image and a title in the synopsis now. Since the new lessons overview page doesn't use these elements. So just use your ul and li's for this now.
    More on Carbs: What About Grains?
    This is the main focus image on every lesson.
    This is the mark up for the new summary section.
    Good nutrition doesn't have to sound like rocket science. This week, we'll cover the basics.
   Research on long-term weight loss has made one thing clear: The best healthy diet is the one that you'll stick to over time. The combination of foods that will keep you both fit and happy are bound to be unique, which is why you won’t follow a single meal plan in Prevent. Instead, you'll replace unhealthy foods in your diet with healthy ones that you enjoy eating.
   But what makes a food healthy or unhealthy?
  That’s a topic we’ll begin to tackle in this lesson, starting with the single smartest change anyone can make to their diet.
     You’ve no doubt heard the term ‘empty calories.’ It describes any food that delivers a lot of calories, but offers very little nutrition. Check out the top sources of empty calories in the American diet.
       If these are some of your favorite foods, you're not alone. It's hard not to love soda and ice cream. Don't worry — we’re not expecting you to give them up on the spot. This program is about making small changes over several months. (And, realistically, even the healthiest eaters have empty calorie foods now and then.) But there’s no getting around the fact that, for most people, eating these foods on a regular basis will lead to weight gain and increased risk of diseases like type-2 diabetes and heart disease.
      For the next few weeks, we ask that you record everything you eat and drink in your Daily Food Tracker (or by using the Prevent mobile app). Tracking your meals, snacks, and beverages will make you and your coach aware of your current diet, so you can decide what you want to focus on next.
      What are your top sources of empty calories that you can begin cutting back on?
      A quick guide to proteins, fats, and carbohydrates.
      Everything you eat is mostly made up of some combination of fat, protein, and carbohydrates (carbs). Each of these nutrients play a key role in your body.
               Proteins are the building blocks of muscle and tissue, making them essential to growth and healing. They support immune function, and are used to make hormones and enzymes. Protein is also a backup source of energy when carbohydrates aren't available. When it comes to eating protein, lean sources are great for your health.
               Fat is key for growth and development, and provides your body with energy. It also stores nutrients, protects your organs, and maintains cell structure. As we’ll soon discuss, there are healthy fats you should eat more of, and unhealthy fats that you should try to limit.
              Carbs are your body's main source of energy, and support the central nervous system, kidneys, brain, and muscles. As someone at risk for chronic disease, and who may have tried to lose weight before, you’ve probably heard a lot of advice about eating carbs. Let's take a minute to set the record straight.
         Eating fiber has multiple health benefits — we’ll talk more about fiber on the next page.
        Bottom line: You have to be very careful about how many carbs you consume in the form of sugar and starch.
      If you’re not yet a fan of fiber, you will be very soon.
      Fiber — which is found in the skin and flesh of fruits and vegetables, the outer layers of grains, and in beans, legumes, and nuts — can't be digested, so it fills up your stomach without adding calories. That’s great for weight loss since it allows you to eat low-calorie meals that still leave you feeling satisfied. Fiber can also slow the absorption of sugar, fat, and cholesterol into the body, which is especially beneficial for people at risk for type 2 diabetes or heart disease.
      Many packaged products (most notably breads and cereals) are high in fiber, but they typically deliver a lot of unhealthy ingredients along with it. Your goal is to get natural fiber in the form of whole, unprocessed foods like the ones below.
      One place you won’t get fiber: Refined carbs. Refined carbs are fruits, vegetables, and grains that have been stripped of their natural fiber during processing (think: juice, white bread, white rice, regular pasta and flour). Taking out the fiber makes these foods instantly less healthy — research shows diets high in refined carbs and low in fiber more than double a person's risk of diabetes.
      Whenever possible, you should avoid refined carbs. Unfortunately, that's hard to do. Most bags, boxes, and bottles on grocery store shelves are packed with them.
      Consider a whole apple vs. a glass of apple juice. When you eat a whole apple, its fiber content slows digestion, so the sugar it contains enters your blood stream gradually. Juice, on the other hand, is a refined carb — all of the fibrous skin and pulp from the apples have been removed during the juicing process — so the sugar it contains hits your bloodstream fast, causing a blood sugar spike that’s potentially damaging for someone at risk for type 2 diabetes. In fact, because of that sugar rush, juice is just as bad for your body as soda.
        Did You Know?
          Cattle aren’t fed refined carbohydrates. Farmers include all of a grain's original unprocessed fiber in feed to slow down absorption. They've learned that processing grains too much makes cattle sick.
    More on Carbs: What About Grains?
      Even if you're well-informed about health and nutrition, grains can be confusing. To get a clear picture of what makes some grains better than others, you need to know the difference between intact grains, whole grains, and processed grains.
      Intact grains are grains like brown rice, barley, and quinoa, which have not been refined. They remain in one solid piece, and so retain their fiber. Of the three types of grains, intact grains are slowest to break down into sugar in your body. That makes them the best choice.
      Whole grains are grains that have been partly refined to create a smoother texture. During this process, some fiber is usually removed. Because whole grains are cut up into smaller pieces and contain less fiber, your body breaks them down into sugar more quickly than intact grains. Whole grains are also often combined with a lot of sugar (and other unhealthy ingredients) to make products like breads, cereals, and energy bars. You have to examine the Nutrition Facts panel of whole grain products to find out if they are healthy. We'll explain exactly how to do that in a future lesson.
      Processed grains have had all of their fiber removed to create an ultra-smooth texture. They are found in foods like cakes, cookies, pastries, and white bread. Of the three type of grains, processed grains are the fastest to convert to sugar in your body, and are therefore most likely to contribute to weight gain and raise your risk for certain diseases like type-2 diabetes.
      We recommend that you avoid processed grains whenever possible. As for whole grains and intact grains, upcoming lessons will help you determine how often you should include them in your diet. Many people find they need to reduce their intake of grains (or even temporarily avoid them) in order to reach their weight goals.
      Unsaturated fats (monounsaturated & polyunsaturated) are healthy fats. Research shows eating foods rich in these fats can improve cholesterol levels, lower blood pressure, and also possibly stabilize blood sugar.
      Good sources of unsaturated fats include those pictured above, plus olives, hazelnuts, pecans, walnuts, pumpkin seeds, sesame seeds, sunflower seeds, mackerel, trout, sunflower oil, and safflower oil. Add more of these foods to your diet!
      Saturated fats are found in animal products, like meat and butter, and some vegetable oils, like palm kernel oil and coconut oil. Recent research indicates that saturated fat may not be as unhealthy as once believed. Still, it's important to limit your saturated fat intake. Studies suggest that consuming too much saturated fat can lead to high cholesterol, cardiovascular disease, and type-2 diabetes.
       When choosing foods that contain saturated fat, favor natural options like eggs and leaner cuts of meat, or minimally processed dairy like plain yogurt and cheese. Wondering if you should choose low-fat or full-fat dairy? Consider if you're already eating a lot of foods that contain saturated fat. If meat and eggs are a big part of your diet, for example, low-fat dairy may be the better choice.
      Trans fats are terrible for your health. These fats are man-made for the purpose of increasing shelf life and flavor stability in packaged foods. They not only raise bad (LDL) cholesterol and lower good (HDL) cholesterol, lead to the buildup of plaque in arteries, and up your risk for heart disease and stroke, they’ve also been linked to diabetes. Most food manufacturers have begun removing trans fats from their products, some still lurk in shortening, doughnuts, cookies, crackers, French fries, margarine, and microwave popcorn.
       One more thing about fat: A gram of fat delivers 9 calories, while a gram of carbs or protein delivers 4. Losing weight and keeping it off for a lifetime requires you to focus on much more than calories, but calories still matter. If you continually eat more calories than you burn, you will put on pounds. Limiting saturated fat in your diet — especially from heavily processed meats like hot dogs and deli meats — will help you reduce your overall calorie intake. And when you eat healthy fats — from foods like fish, nuts, seeds, olive oil, and canola oil — you can feel good that those calories are contributing to your health.
        Did You Know?
          Certain foods may make you mean! A study from the University of California, San Diego, linked the consumption of dietary trans fatty acids with increased feelings of irritability and aggression.
      Nuts and seeds are great sources of healthy fats. How often do you eat them?
              Can you think of one or two nuts or seeds that you've tried in the past and like? Where might you keep a few bags so that they'll be handy when you crave a snack?
              Can you think of one or two nuts or seeds that you've tried in the past and like? Where might you keep a few bags so that they'll be handy when you crave a snack?
              Which nuts and/or seeds do you usually eat? Are there any mentioned on the previous page that you've never had before, but would be interested in trying?
              Which nuts and/or seeds do you usually eat? Are there any mentioned on the previous page that you've never had before, but would be interested in trying?
    This is the main focus image on every lesson.
    This is the mark up for the new summary section.
    There are hundreds of beverages out there for you to choose from, but the healthiest option is always H2O.
      Like we mentioned on page 1 of this lesson, beverages are a major source of empty calories. Even drinks that aren’t loaded with carbs and sugar — like diet soft drinks — can harm your health. Studies have found an association between artificially sweetened beverages, weight gain, and type 2 diabetes. So what should you drink? Water.
      Drinking enough water can actually make weight loss easier. People often mistake dehydration for hunger or food cravings, and water takes up space in your stomach leaving less for food. One study found that people who drank a glass of water before each meal ate 75 fewer calories.
       Some people have already found their love for plain old water. But if you prefer flavored drinks, downing several cups of tasteless liquid may not be appealing. One solution: make your water more interesting. Just add a palmful of thinly-sliced fruit to your glass, then mix in a veggie or fresh herb — or both (get some ideas by clicking on each of the numbers on the interactive module below). Not your thing? Consider drinking more unsweetened decaf coffee or tea.
            Go for this mix anytime you want to feel more alert. It delivers nutrients like potassium and Vitamin C that help fight fatigue. And the scent of mint is an instant eye-opener.
              This combination battles toxins and ups nutrient absorption by protecting your liver and stimulating your gallbladder. Tip: Try peeling fresh ginger with the edge of a spoon.
              Lemon aids in digestion and contains immune system-boosting vitamin C. Cucumbers can help you get rid of excess water (read: less bloating).
              Basil helps relieve stress, tension, and headache. Refreshing cucumbers reduce bloat, and blueberries contribute to memory and brain function.
        Did You Know?
          Since we all weigh and sweat different amounts, eight glasses of water a day isn’t going to work for all of us. A better indicator of how much you need to drink is the color of your urine. The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics says that if your urine is clear to light yellow, you’re well hydrated. If it’s a darker, honey to amber hue, you need to drink up.
          Start cutting out empty calories and reducing your intake of processed carbs.
          Think about the types of fats that you're consuming and the amount of total fat in your food. Try to replace unhealthy fats with healthy ones.
          Make water your go-to beverage.
          Weigh in daily.
          Track your daily eating habits using the Prevent mobile app, the tracker on your main Group Page, or the paper tracker.
          Contribute to the group discussion.
    Healthy eating starts at the grocery store. Here's how to fill your cart with all the right foods.
  The logic is pretty air tight: If unhealthy foods never make it into your shopping cart, there will be fewer of them in your kitchen, and so not as many will end up in your mouth. But shopping smart is easier said than done — supermarkets are carefully designed to sell food, not prevent disease. That’s why you need a plan going in. These four strategies will help you focus on healthy options, and avoid junk food traps.
        1. Make a list.
             Going shopping without a list puts you in ‘browsing’ mode, which opens the door to endless temptation. Make a list of what you need and (this is the hard part) buy only what’s on it. This strategy prevents your eyes from wandering toward junk food, not to mention saves you money. The trick to making it work: shop quickly and efficiently to avoid distraction. Organize your list by department so you can zip past aisles stocked with refined carbs, and give ‘sample tables’ a wide berth.
        2. Shop alone.
             The more people you shop with, the less control you have over what ends up in your cart. You simply can't expect others to keep your health priorities in mind. So, whenever possible, head to the grocery store on your own. We realize this may be a major challenge. You may have to shop on your way home from work, or head out early on a weekend morning while your spouse or a grandparent is home with the kids. If there’s no way around a family trip, avoiding the snack and cereal aisles is even more important.
        3. Don't shop hungry.
             An empty stomach can influence your brain in powerful ways. In one study, people who bought groceries after fasting purchased 31% more junk food than those who ate something first. Do your very best to shop shortly after a meal. Or drink a glass of water and snack on a piece of fruit before going in. Last resort: If you arrive at the store hungry, head straight to the produce aisle, grab an apple, pay for it in the express lane, then do the rest of your shopping. Armed with a satisfied stomach, you will have more willpower to resist advertising gimmicks and unhealthy foods.
             The outer aisles of supermarkets are home to the healthiest, freshest foods like produce, dairy, lean meats, and fish. Spend most of your time there, then  move into the middle. There are plenty of healthy foods in the center aisles, including great options like no-sugar nut butters, steel-cut oats, canned and dried beans, and frozen produce. But these items are typically surrounded by refined carbs in packaging designed to grab your attention. By keeping your eyes on your list and not lingering, you’ll easily pass unwanted products by.
      How many of the above supermarket rules do you already follow most of the time?
              Try following just one of these rules on your next shopping trip. Which do you think would be easiest to start with?
              Which of these rules seems most challenging to you? What one thing might you do to make it easier to follow?
              Since you have these rules down, think about the last time you bought something unhealthy at the supermarket. What may have influenced your decision?
    Nutrition Facts panels can tell you a lot — if you know what to look for.
    We've already agreed that one of the best ways to control what you eat is to be more critical about what you buy. That includes examining the Nutrition Facts panel on every packaged food that you pick up. Sorting through this list of grams and percentages can be time-consuming and confusing. Rather than try to pick apart every line, get a quick sense of how healthy or unhealthy a product is by paying attention to the following five areas.
          Find out what to focus on by clicking on all the sections outlined in blue.
                Every number on a Nutrition Facts panel is based on the stated serving size. The problem: That serving size can be unrealistic — a packet of cheese-filled pretzels the size of a teabag might have a serving size of “1/2 package,” or a 16-ounce bottle of soda might have a serving size of "6 ounces." That means you have to do the math to see how the number of servings you consume impacts calories, carbs, sugar, and other ingredients. A better idea: view the tiny serving size as a red flag that the food is packed with too many calories, and skip it.
               As you learned in Lesson 2, trans fat is bad news. If a product contains any at all, you shouldn’t eat it. Unfortunately, sneaky labeling laws allow food companies to list amounts up to .5 grams of trans fat per serving as 0 grams. To double-check that a food is truly free of trans fat, scan the ingredient list for the word “hydrogenated,” which is a dead giveaway that trans fat is present.
              3. Favor natural fiber — not fakes.
                Most of your fiber (aim for about 30g/day) should come from non-starchy veggies and low-sugar fruits. When you do buy packaged foods that contain fiber, choose those that have at least 3 grams per serving. Then make sure that intact grains (like brown rice, barley, buckwheat, steel-cut oats) show up on the ingredients list or, at the very least, the words ‘whole grain.’ Otherwise, the fiber may be from dubious sources (like maltodextrin, inulin, or pectin) that may not have the same health benefits.
                  Food manufacturers know that health-focused consumers are on the lookout for sugar, so they've started sneaking it in under many different names. Prime examples: sugar alcohols, high fructose corn syrup, and any words ending in the letters ‘ose’ like dextrose or maltose. There are countless more (check out this list), so a good rule of thumb is that products that contain suspicious-looking ingredients aren't worth buying.
                Eating foods high in protein may help keep hunger under control. When comparing packaged products, go for the one with a higher protein count — provided that the protein isn’t accompanied by high amounts of refined carbs, sugar, sodium, or other unwanted ingredients.
       Every number on a Nutrition Facts panel is based on the stated serving size. The problem: That serving size can be unrealistic — a packet of cheese-filled pretzels the size of a teabag might have a serving size of “1/2 package,” or a 16-ounce bottle of soda might have a serving size of "6 ounces." That means you have to do the math to see how the number of servings you consume impacts calories, carbs, sugar, and other ingredients. A better idea: view the tiny serving size as a red flag that the food is packed with too many calories, and skip it.
        As you learned in Lesson 2, trans fat is bad news. If a product contains any at all, you shouldn’t eat it. Unfortunately, sneaky labeling laws allow food companies to list amounts up to .5 grams of trans fat per serving as 0 grams. To double-check that a food is truly free of trans fat, scan the ingredient list for the word “hydrogenated,” which is a dead giveaway that trans fat is present.
        Most of your fiber (aim for about 30g/day) should come from non-starchy veggies and low-sugar fruits. When you do buy packaged foods that contain fiber, choose those that have at least 3 grams per serving. Then make sure that intact grains (like brown rice, barley, buckwheat, steel-cut oats) show up on the ingredients list or, at the very least, the words ‘whole grain.’ Otherwise, the fiber may be from dubious sources (like maltodextrin, inulin, or pectin) that may not have the same health benefits.
         Food manufacturers know that health-focused consumers are on the lookout for sugar, so they've started sneaking it in under many different names. Prime examples: sugar alcohols, high fructose corn syrup, and any words ending in the letters ‘ose’ like dextrose or maltose. There are countless more (check out this list), so a good rule of thumb is that products that contain suspicious-looking ingredients aren't worth buying.
        Eating foods high in protein may help keep hunger under control. When comparing packaged products, go for the one with a higher protein count — provided that the protein isn’t accompanied by high amounts of refined carbs, sugar, sodium, or other unwanted ingredients.
      Last but not least, at the bottom of every Nutrition Facts panel lies the ingredients list. This is where you need to look to make sure that the word "hydrogenated" (a sign trans fats are present) doesn’t show up, or any other AKAs that indicate a product is trying to hide unhealthy ingredients.
      In general, the longer a product’s ingredient list is, the greater the chances it contains something unhealthy. When buying packaged foods, choose those that have five ingredients or fewer, and make sure all five are things you recognize and can pronounce.
    Products that claim to be healthy can be packed with hidden sugar and refined carbs. Learn how to identify these food frauds at a glance.
   It's getting hard to find a processed food that doesn't feature one or more health claims on its packaging. How many times have you read claims like “all natural” or “made with 100% real fruit” on products like sugary breakfast cereals or cookies?
   Claims like these can influence our thinking. Research shows that people underestimate the number of calories in foods bearing health claims, and tend to end up eating more as a result. The truth is, most of these claims are unregulated, which means any company can say them about any product.
   Even if a product does have one good quality, that doesn't mean it's good for you. A cereal that's “98% fat-free” can still be an unhealthy sugar bomb with little to no fiber. “Local and organic” ice cream is still loaded with sugar, fat, and calories. “Multigrain” bread contains more than one kind of grain, but that doesn’t mean any of them are intact or even whole grains.
   “Sugar-free” and “low-carb” candy might not have any of the real white stuff, but will most certainly have plenty of artificial stand-ins. Juices or fruit snacks boasting that they’re a “good source of antioxidants” or “vitamin C” are still refined carbs packing calories and sugar. We could go on and on, but you get the point.
    How are you supposed to spot these phony health labels when marketers are constantly coming up with new ones? Your best defense is to be skeptical, and always examine the food label. By following the strategies you just learned about on the previous page, you can determine if a food really deserves a place on your plate.
      In the past, how likely were you to look at a product's Nutrition Facts panel before buying it?
              Consider what might make it easier for you to read Nutrition Facts panels. Could you shop on weekends so you have more time, or research products online before you head to the store?
              Pick a claim in the graphic above that you find convincing. Which part(s) of a Nutrition Facts panel can you examine to find out if a product that makes this claim is truly healthy?
              As someone who examines packages and Nutrition Facts panels closely, which misleading claims do you think even a well-informed person might easily fall for?
            Amazing job. You bought zero baloney!
            Well done, but a gimmicky label or two slipped through.
            Those gimmicky labels can be tricky. We bet you’ll do better next time.
            You bought A LOT of baloney. Keep playing until you can avoid all the gimmicky labels.
                      the baloney!
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                      the baloney!
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                      the baloney!
                  The gimmicky health claim here is 'carb smart.' Any product can claim to be 'carb smart,' no matter how many carbs are listed on its nutrition label.
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                   You avoided the phony 'carb smart' label. Any product can claim to be 'carb smart,' no matter how many carbs are listed on its nutrition label.
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                      the baloney!
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                      the baloney!
                      the baloney!
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                      the baloney!
                  Ok, so the gluten-free label isn't a lie — it means that a product is free of wheat. But for people without a gluten allergy, the health buzz around gluten-free products is unfounded. Gluten-free pasta is just as packed with refined carbs as regular pasta.
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                      the baloney!
                   Oops. Labels that tout 'immunity-boosting' powers may get your attention, but they aren't likely to prevent you from getting sick. This one is a phony.
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                      the baloney!
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                      the baloney!
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                  Kudos for knowing that the 'no growth hormones' claim is a bit misleading  -  farmers are never allowed to feed growth hormones to poultry or pork, so chicken or pork with this label isn't anything special.
                      the baloney!
                  The phony health claim slipped by you this time. Drinking 'raw' milk puts you at risk of serious food-borne illness, and claims that unpasteurized milk is better for digestion remain unproven.
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                  You're right to skip 'raw' milk. Because it's unpasteurized, raw milk can harbor bacteria that cause serious illness, and claims that it aids digestion remain unproven.
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                      the baloney!
                   The 'omega 3' claim isn't as good as it sounds. The chickens who laid these eggs may have been fed fish oil or flaxseed rich in omega-3 fatty acids, but this practice is unregulated, so there's no way to tell how much omega-3 fatty acids they consumed, or how much ended up in their eggs.
                      the baloney!
                  This has 'phony' written all over it. Margarines - even those that state they are 'healthy' or 'balanced' - often contain trans fat in the form of hydrogenated oil.
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                  Yep, in this case, butter is better. Margarines — even those that claim to be 'healthy' or 'balanced' — often contain trans fat in the form of hydrogenated oil.
                      the baloney!
                     Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                  Well played. The 'excellent source of fiber' claim is official — these products must provide at least 5 grams of natural fiber per serving. Products with 'extra fiber' or 'added fiber,' on the other hand, may contain fake fibers that have not been proven to have the same health benefits as natural fiber.
                      Great choice! You didn't buy the baloney.
                      the baloney!
            Don't Buy the Baloney!
              Gimmicky labels are lurking on the shelves of this grocery store. Your mission: choose the product in each pair that DOESN'T feature a misleading health claim.
    Now that you have your shopping strategies down, it's time to get a handle on less-than-ideal eating habits.
    Raiding a coworker’s candy jar, grabbing some greasy fast-food, skipping a meal – these behaviors, taken one at a time, don’t seem like a big deal. But if unhealthy slips happen again and again, they can become the norm. Let's take a look at six classic examples of poor choices that can quickly form a negative habit.
             A healthy breakfast (high in protein and fiber) will help stabilize your blood sugar levels all day long. Ideally, you should eat within one hour of waking up.To make that happen, it helps to prepare. Chop up scallions and red peppers on the weekend, and you can quickly whip up an omelette before work. Typically not hungry in the morning? Try eating a lighter or earlier dinner so you have a better appetite in the a.m.
             Most workplace breakrooms are packed wall to wall with sugar-laden, carb-heavy "treats." Defend yourself by stashing healthy snacks in your desk and taking them with you to gatherings. You can also try to be a force for positive change at your workplace by asking whoever is in charge of stocking the kitchen to include healthy options like small packages of unsalted nuts or daily trays of cut veggies and hummus. If it’s your turn to plan a birthday or promotion get-together, show your coworkers how it’s done by busting out a delicious platter of fresh fruit and cheese.
            The popular idea that you should eat six small meals throughout the day is a dangerous one for anyone who has trouble with portion control — it’s just too easy to overeat. And, the truth is, that applies to most of us. It’s tough to remember what a proper portion looks like in the moment (we’ll work on that in the next lesson). It’s also not totally clear if grazing is a good or bad thing for blood sugar. Some recent research suggests that the opposite — occasional fasting — can actually benefit diabetes. For now, a smart approach is to stick to three healthy meals and small snacks when you need them.
            When a beer comes accompanied by wings and nachos, you’re talking about enough additional calories and fat to undo whatever healthy eating you’ve done all day. While moderate drinking — one drink a day for women and two for men — can be okay even for people at risk for chronic disease, drinking on an empty stomach or when your blood sugar is low (as it’s likely to be by early evening) isn’t. To avoid the bar-food trap, keep a stash of healthy snacks like nuts and fruit in your bag, and satisfy your stomach on the way to the bar.
            Research shows people are satisfied with less food when they focus their five senses on what they’re eating. If you’re staring at your phone or watching TV, that’s not happening. Before you know it, your lunch will have disappeared into thin air, but because you weren’t really present as you ate, you’re left wanting more… and more. To avoid overeating, your attention needs to be on your food. That means fully seeing, tasting, smelling, feeling, and even hearing the food go down. The easiest way to do this is to make a no-electronics-while-eating rule. Turn off the TV and leave the laptop to sit down, and focus on your meal or snack.
            Bad news for anyone who likes to (or has to) stay up late: Research shows being a night owl can put you at risk for weight gain because we tend to eat more calories after dark.  Keep options like plain Greek yogurt and herbal tea or apples and almond butter on hand, so that when you do raid the kitchen at night, you have smart choices in mind and don’t go looking for something else. Wish you could tuck in earlier, but seldom feel tired enough? Consider some late afternoon exercise, which can often make falling asleep easier.
      Whether you're working full-time, unemployed, in school, retired, or home with the kids, your lifestyle impacts your eating habits. Which parts of your daily routine typically lead to unhealthy eating?
          Start heading to the supermarket on your own, and armed with a list that you'll stick to.
          Practice reading food labels and spotting health food phonies at home and at the grocery store.
          Share strategies for handling potentially tricky eating situations with the rest of your group.
          Weigh in daily.
          Track your daily eating habits using the Prevent mobile app, the tracker on your main group page, or the paper tracker.
          Contribute to the group discussion.
    Fill up on tasty whole foods and there won't be any room left for unhealthy options.
      The simplest way to eat healthfully is to eat whole foods. “Whole foods” are foods that are  still in, or close to, their natural state. They haven’t been broken down into parts and stuffed into bags, boxes, bottles or tubes. Think vegetables and fresh fruits  or cuts of meat and fish like chicken thighs or a fillet of salmon. Whole foods still have all of their original nutrients intact without any of the sugar, salt, or chemicals added during processing.
      Keeping things natural has a direct effect on your health. A 2012 study compared two diets that had the same number of calories. One diet contained processed food, and the other didn't. The processed-food diet was linked to more body fat and type 2 diabetes.
      Whole vegetables and fruits are also ideal for weight loss because they retain their natural fiber and water content. Fiber and water add volume to food without adding calories. Most people don’t realize just how low-calorie vegetables and fruits can be. A cup of lettuce has just 5 calories, and a medium tomato has only 22.
      In fact, you could pack your entire stomach full of a high-fiber, water-rich veggie like broccoli for just 200 calories. The opposite is true of highly processed foods like potato chips. Two hundred calories worth of chips takes up barely any space in your stomach at all — which means you'll want to keep munching.
      When deciding what to eat in any situation, start with whole foods.
        Thinking back over the past week, what fraction of your diet was made of up of whole foods?
                Of the processed foods you do still buy, which one or two are the most unhealthy? How might you cut back on them?
                Of the processed foods you do still buy, which one or two are the most unhealthy? How might you cut back on them?
                Which whole foods do you eat the most of? How might you incorporate those foods into more of your meals and snacks?
                Which whole foods do you eat the most of? How might you incorporate those foods into more of your meals and snacks?
  Limiting carbs is the hardest thing you’ll have to do in this program, but it’s worth it.
  Research suggests that the most effective way to lower risk for diabetes and heart disease is to cut back on carbohydrates. Avoiding refined carbs with little or no fiber, such as regular pasta, crackers, chips, pretzels, cookies, and white bread is a crucial first step. For some people, that alone may lead to adequate weight loss. For others, getting to a healthy weight may also require limiting healthy, high-carb foods like intact grains.
    You've probably heard of “low-carb diets,” or have even tried a few. The problem with the majority of these diets is that they dictate how many carbs you should eat without considering your individual needs. Your eating plan has to be realistic given your capacity for change, your lifestyle and family, your financial situation, and many other factors, including how much you love carbs!
    If you're used to enjoying a lot of carbs, cutting back will involve big changes to how you shop and cook. If your culture celebrates rice, corn, or pasta, carbs will be tough to avoid during family meals. Don't have much money to spend on groceries? Cutting carbs gets even harder. All of these obstacles can be overcome with careful planning (reach out to your coach for help!), but it won't happen overnight.
   So how will you manage carbs in Prevent? We recommend that you 1) think about the carb content of your food, and 2) cut back as much as you can without feeling miserable or deprived. Keep in mind that the more you limit carbs, the more body weight and body fat you are likely to lose, and the more likely you are to reduce your risk factors for diabetes and heart disease. Do what feels right now, and reassess as time goes on.
    Now let’s go over what an ideal weight-loss promoting, disease-fighting eating plan looks like.
   Healthy eating guidelines tend to be complicated, which makes them nearly impossible to remember and use in real life. In contrast, Prevent’s Healthy Eating Plate aims to be simple and clear. The snapshot below provides you with an ideal to keep in mind, and strive for at most meals.
            Snack on low-sugar fruit, or a handful of nuts or seeds.
            Drink unsweetened beverages.
   Again, you won’t eat this way all the time. Follow these guidelines as consistently as you can. If they seem unrealistic or unappealing, that’s okay. There are many other people in this program who will feel the same way. Consider sharing your doubts with your coach and/or your group. Then start small. You might try swapping one of your usual snacks for a handful of nuts, or focus on filling half of your dinner plate with vegetables. Small changes will open the door to bigger ones.
    Next, we’ll take a closer look at each part of the picture.
        At most meals, aim to fill half of your plate with non-starchy veggies. Why non-starchy? These veggies contain less of the quickly-digested carbs that it's best to limit as someone at risk for certain chronic diseases. While starchy vegetables provide about 15 grams of carbs per serving, non-starchy veggies usually have less than 5.
        Non-starchy vegetables include leafy greens like cabbage, collard greens, kale, lettuce, spinach, and swiss chard, plus asparagus, beets, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, carrots, cauliflower, celery, cucumber, eggplant, green beans, mushrooms, onions, peppers, and many more.
        Starchy vegetables aren’t unhealthy by any means. They pack loads of healthy nutrients and fiber. But sticking mostly to non-starchy vegetables is an easy way to cut down on your carb intake. Can you eat starchy veggies and still lose weight? Yes! Enjoy them in moderation: Stick to ½ cup per serving.
        For an ideal meal, the rest of your plate should be filled with protein and healthy fats. Excellent sources of protein are fish and seafood, chicken (white or dark  meat), eggs, and lean cuts of pork and beef. Beans and tofu are also great protein foods, particularly for vegetarians and vegans. The top sources of healthy unsaturated fats are avocado, olives and olive oil, fatty fish like salmon and tuna, nuts, and seeds.
        In real life, your meals aren’t going to be split down the middle, with veggies on one side, and protein and healthy fats on the other. Whether you’re making a shrimp and broccoli stir-fry, topping a pile of collard greens with pork chops, or tossing a steak and spinach salad with vinaigrette, things get mixed up. The half & half guideline is to remind you that 1) non-starchy veggies are a major part of your meal, not just a “side,” and 2) a meal isn’t balanced without lean protein plus healthy fat.
        Choose intact grains. Intact grains such as brown rice, barley, quinoa, and steel-cut oats have the most fiber.
        Go easy on cheese. Most hard or semi-soft cheeses are low-carb, but have a lot of calories and saturated fat, so you should aim to eat less than 4 oz. of cheese in a day. If you eat more, choose lower-fat options.
        Balance your meal. If you include a higher-carb food, make sure the rest of your meal is lower in carbs. For example, when having a small portion of grains, limit the amount of fruit or starchy vegetables in the same meal.
     The best snacks don’t require preparation and are easy to carry with you. That’s why we recommend nuts, seeds, or some low-sugar fruit.
      Almonds, pistachios, walnuts, pecans, pumpkin seeds and sunflower seeds are great snack choices. Sticking to a small handful will help you avoid getting too many calories.
      For fruit, strawberries, raspberries, and blackberries are fantastic for snacking because they're easy to pack and especially low in sugar. Other low-sugar fruits include watermelon, grapefruit, fresh cranberries, tomatoes, and avocado (yes, those last two are technically fruit, not vegetables). Lemons and limes are also low-sugar, which makes them great for slicing up and using to flavor your food or water.
      There are so many other fruits you can and should enjoy. When eating fruit other than the ones above, just watch your portions to avoid getting too much sugar at once. Choose smaller apples, peaches, pears, etc. Have half a banana instead of a whole one, eat a cup of grapes instead of a whole bowl… you get the idea.
      You’ll find more ideas for healthy snacks in future lessons, but we recommend that you stock up on these fruits, nuts, and seeds, and keep them on hand at home, work, or anywhere else where you spend your time.
      As discussed in Lesson 2, you want your beverages to be free of sweeteners (natural or artificial). When your goal is to lose weight and avoid illnesses like type-2 diabetes and heart disease, avoiding sugary beverages like soda and energy drinks is essential.
    Plan and prepare a full day of balanced eating.
    With all of your new knowledge and a couple of weeks of practice making healthy changes, it’s time to plan for a full day of healthy eating. You'll need to think ahead (decide what you'll eat, make a shopping list, get to the store, and schedule time to prepare and pack food). Below are super-simple ideas to get you started.
    Think Out of the (Cereal) Box for Breakfast.
        Two eggs cooked any way with salsa and avocado slices.
        Sliced turkey on cucumber slices with dill.
    Savor Soup or Salad for Lunch.
      Broth-based soups with plenty of protein and vegetables are satisfying thanks to high water and fiber content. (Avoid cream-based soups which pack a lot of calories.) If the idea of a salad makes you groan, you probably haven't given this healthy staple a chance. By experimenting with greens (try spinach, kale, butter lettuce, red cabbage), and adding toppings that are as delicious as they are good for you (avocado, peppers, chicken, shrimp) you can turn a salad into a tasty feast. For dressing, pick vinaigrettes over higher-calorie creamy options.
    Take Healthy Shortcuts at Dinner.
      If you’re new to cooking vegetables, make it fast and easy by buying veggies that have already been cleaned, cut, and packaged (look for steamer bags that you can put right in the microwave). Frozen vegetables and veggie mixes are also fantastic. Stir fry them in olive oil, and season with your favorite herbs and spices. For quick protein, consider picking up a rotisserie chicken, or buying frozen fish fillets that you can bake in the oven with olive oil, lemon, salt and pepper.
        Salads incorporate whole foods, fiber, color, and can easily include a balance of protein, veggies, and fruit. But if you don’t get creative, salads can also be blah.
        What are your secrets for making salads more satisfying, while still keeping them healthy?
      Eating the right amount of food is one of the hardest healthy skills to master. Use these five strategies to keep your portions under control.
    1. Eat on schedule.
      It's counter-intuitive, but an important part of controlling portion size is ensuring you get enough food. Eating at regular intervals throughout your day — three balanced meals and healthy snacks in between — will reduce the temptation to overdo it at any one sitting.
    2. Get the hang of rating hunger.
      Eating when you’re hungry (not starved), and stopping when you’re full (not stuffed), takes awareness. You have to know what different levels of hunger feel like. Study the chart below, and start eating when you reach level 3, and stop when you reach level 4 or 5.
    3. Switch to a smaller dish.
      If you use a smaller plate (9 inches vs. 12) or bowl, you’ll be more likely to serve yourself a smaller portion. And research has shown people feel more satisfied with less food when eating off of a smaller plate.
      Instead of putting heaps of food in the middle of the table (which cues you to have seconds and thirds), give everyone one serving, and keep the rest of the food out of sight.
    5. Choose smart seconds.
      If you’re still hungry after eating healthy portions, choose an extra serving of non-starchy veggies to fill you up.
        Which of the following factors would be most likely to cause you to overeat?
            I wait to eat until I’m starving.
                At what time do you usually eat breakfast, lunch, and dinner? What’s the halfway point between each meal when you should have a snack?
            I eat while distracted.
                At which meal are you least able to focus on your food? How might you prevent or avoid what distracts you?
            If I like something, I eat a lot of it.
                Which of the above strategies might help you eat less of something, no matter how much you’re enjoying it?
          Focus on eating whole foods.
          Use the Healthy Eating Plate guidelines to plan a full day of healthy meals and snacks, and let your health coach know how it works out for you!
          Step on your scale every day.
          Track your daily eating habits using the Prevent mobile app, the tracker on your main group page, or the paper tracker.
          Contribute to the group discussion.
    Time to Get Moving!
  Time to Get Moving!
    Ease into an exercise schedule that feels good, fits your life, and keeps you healthy.
    Now that you've started choosing whole foods and avoiding sugar and other refined carbs, your energy levels will be on the rise. That makes this a perfect time to get more active. Research on fitness shows that at least 150 minutes of heart-pumping (a.k.a. cardiovascular or "cardio") activity each week, plus 2 weekly muscle-strengthening workouts is an ideal combination for long-term health. While that's your ultimate goal, we suggest that you start slow and do what feels realistic for you. Give yourself a weekly goal that you can meet, whether that's 30 minutes of activity, the full 150 minutes, or even more. If you need help setting an activity goal, reach out to your coach.
    We’ll talk about toning your muscles in Lesson 6. This week, let's focus on cardio. To strengthen your heart, you'll need to exercise at "moderate intensity" for at least 10 minutes at a time. How do you know if you're exercising at moderate intensity? Pay attention to your breathing. You should be able to talk fairly easily during a moderate-intensity workout, but you should not be able to sing. If you can belt out a tune while doing cardio, pick up your pace, and try the singing test again.
    If you haven’t been exercising, start with an activity that's easy, and that doesn't require much preparation or gear. Most people in Prevent begin with brisk walks around their home or workplace, but there are countless ways to do cardio. From Aikido to Zumba, you won't know what you like until you try it.
      Planning exactly how you'll hit 150 minutes at the beginning of each week will go a long way toward making it happen. On Sundays, grab your calendar and plot out the days and times you'll get moving.
      Bonus: When you exercise more intensely, you don’t have to go as long. In terms of health benefits, 1 minute of vigorous-intensity activity (you're breathing so fast, it's difficult to talk) is about the same as 2 minutes of moderate-intensity activity. If all of your cardio were vigorous, you’d only have to rack up 75 minutes per week, instead of 150.
      It’s tough to overstate the benefits of being physically active. Beyond helping you lose weight and keep it off, exercise can keep your heart and lungs healthy, boost your mood, and strengthen your bones. Recent research also suggests that regular exercise can slow down the processes associated with aging.
      A sedentary lifestyle, on the other hand, has been associated with greater risk of chronic disease, depression, obesity, and higher blood sugar levels — all compelling reasons to strap on your sneakers and break a sweat!
      Especially important for individuals at risk for type two diabetes: Getting moving improves blood sugar control, which helps lower that risk. The more regularly you exercise, the more positive and powerful the impact on your health.
    There are a few basic things to consider before starting any activity routine.
            Don’t have a pair of comfy, supportive walking shoes or sneakers? Head to a store that specializes in athletic footwear, where they will consider the shape and size of your foot, your activity level, and the terrain where you will do most of your walking before fitting you with the perfect shoe.
            Warm up at a slower pace for 2 to 3 minutes before increasing your speed. Focus on regular breathing to give your muscles the oxygen they need to move efficiently.
            Pay attention to your body throughout your exercise for signs of pain or strain. If you have a sprain or other injury that keeps you from walking, talk to your coach about trying a different activity while your body heals.
      Think of a time when you had fun doing something physical. It could be anything - from bowling to badminton. What comes to mind? How and why did it make you feel good?
    This handy little tool will help you boost activity throughout your day.
    If you haven't yet set up your Prevent pedometer, the animation below will take you through the process. NOTE: Some participants will receive a different pedometer than the one shown here. If that's the case for you, please follow the instructions that came along with your model.
            Walk 10 paces using your normal stride, then measure the entire distance in inches.
            Divide the total distance by 10 to get your stride length.
            Press and hold SET until the display flashes.
            Use MODE to select miles. Press SET to confirm.
            Use MODE to select a 12-hour or 24-hour clock. Press SET to confirm.
            Use MODE / MEM buttons to enter your stride length. Press SET to confirm.
            Use MODE / MEM buttons to enter the current time. Press SET to confirm.
            Press MODE to toggle between mile, steps, and time.
            To see steps taken recently, press MODE to select steps, then press MEM to cycle through.
    This week, we ask that you begin to keep track of the number of steps you take each day. Enter your steps in the Physical Activity tracker module on your Progress page. You can also record your steps using the Prevent mobile app.
      Did You Know?
        A major research study of more than 300,000 participants showed that people who walked regularly cut their risk of type 2 diabetes by 30%.
        Even your busiest days are full of opportunities to be active.
    Yes, household chores and weekly errands (vacuuming, mowing the lawn, running to the bank before it closes) can count as physical activity if you really get a move on. But in order to lose weight and lower your risk of diabetes and heart disease, you have to do more.
    Luckily, doing more can be a cinch. Getting active during your daily routine is the best way to make exercise consistent and sustainable. We have 7 ideas to get you started. Even if they don't apply to your life, they may spark ideas that do.
            If you take public transportation, get off the train or bus one stop earlier and walk from there. Driving? Park down the road from your destination and walk the rest of the way.
            Get in the habit of taking a walk around the neighborhood (or building, or parking lot) when you're finished eating your lunch. Recruit someone to join you to help make the habit stick.
            Meet with friends for a walk through a park, in a shopping center, or on a school track or sports field. You might be surprised to find that an active get-together is just as fun as one centered around eating and drinking.
            If you often take the elevator in a safe, familiar building, consider taking the stairs all the way or for just a few floors. Walk up escalators to add steps and reach the next level even faster.
            Parking can be a great opportunity for racking up some steps. Make a beeline to the back of a parking lot and walk to the entrance. Downtown? Park a few blocks from your destination.
            When you're on a cell phone call, stand up and pace around the room instead of sitting down. If your job requires you to be on the phone often, request a wireless headset to free you from your chair.
            Don't sit and watch that play date or sports game. Walk around the play structure at the park, take laps around the field or court, go up and down the bleachers a few times, or find an empty row where you can pace.
        Did You Know?
          Although exercise at any time of day is good for you, moderate exercise after a meal may have the best effect on blood sugar control.
      It's easy to talk yourself out of a workout. Here's how to argue with your inner couch potato.
    It happens to the best of us: A crazy busy day, an enticing invitation, or the siren call of a comfy couch gets in the way of your planned physical activity. But whether it’s a walk or some other form of exercise, you have to stick with your plan if you want to achieve your goals in this program and build a healthy habit that can last for life.
    How do you talk yourself into following through when you're tempted to back out? Try crushing common excuses with these responses.
      As busy as you are, consider that a 30-minute walk is really only 2% of your whole day. Break it up into threes and each 10-minute walk takes less than 1% of your day.
      Listening to a comedy station on Pandora while you walk, waiting to read a favorite magazine or watch a guilty-pleasure TV show until you’re on the stationary bike, or inviting your funniest friend to join you can turn exercise into something to look forward to.
      Research shows that people feel more energized on days when they walk more steps, and less energized on days when they walk less.
      Would you back out last-minute on a commitment to a friend or relative who needed your help? Well, then why would you change your mind about doing something important for yourself?
    Which long-term personal activity goal would you find inspiring? Complete a 5K? Go on a cycling vacation with your family? Hike an especially difficult trail? Start swimming laps?
      Make it even easier to stay active by asking people around you to hold you accountable — and give you a push when you need it. Tell  friends, family members, and/or coworkers about your activity goals, and ask them to help you meet them. When everyone is rooting for you, your odds for success will skyrocket.
      Another great way to stay active is to build a support system of people who are on the same mission. Research shows that turning exercise into a social event makes it more enjoyable, so you'll be more pumped to do it.
      How do you find people to work out with? Community and recreation centers, gyms, fitness studios, and pools usually post classes, clubs, group activities, and workshops. Fitness gear stores may also have information about activity groups or may host fitness events themselves.
      If classes and groups aren’t for you, recruit a partner to join you on regular walks or bike rides. You may even find your perfect match in your Prevent group if someone lives or works close by.
      Where will you look for a workout partner to keep you on track? Who might be a good workout partner for you?
          Create a plan for how you'll begin working toward your weekly goal of 150 minutes of moderate aerobic activity per week.
          Clip on your pedometer to start tracking your steps. Or you can download the Prevent mobile app, which may be able to track your steps automatically. Visit our Help Center to find out more.
          Find people among your friends, family, and coworkers who will support your active lifestyle (and even join in).
          Weigh in daily.
          Contribute to the group discussion.
          Continue using the Healthy Eating Plate guidelines to plan meals: Fill your plate with 1/2 veggies and 1/2 protein and healthy fats; snack on nuts, seeds, or low-sugar fruit; drink unsweetened beverages.
          If you find it helpful, keep tracking what you eat and drink.
		Where Does it Hurt?
		For long-term weight loss, get your muscles working.
		Strong muscles are a secret ingredient of healthy, long-term weight loss. Muscles increase your body's capacity to burn calories around the clock, and studies show that people who work their muscles on a regular basis are less likely to regain weight over time. Muscles also boost stamina, improve balance, help prevent injury, and keep bones strong as you age.
     For all of these reasons, we recommend that you do 2 muscle-strengthening workouts each week. Just as with cardio, it's important to determine how much is right for you at this point in time. Based on your physical ability, the advice of your doctor, and your willingness to put in effort, you may choose a different weekly goal. It's better to improve a little at a time than to push yourself too hard and get discouraged.
    Ideally, you'll strengthen all of your major muscle groups in a single workout: legs, hips, back, abdominals, chest, shoulders, and arms. Exercises that work several muscles at once can help you tone your entire body in less than half an hour. You can use equipment like dumbbells, resistance bands, or weight machines. Or you could do a routine of sit-ups, push-ups, squats, and other simple exercises that use your bodyweight for resistance. On the next page, we'll get you started with a workout you can do right at home.
			The only gear you’ll need for this full-body workout is a set of dumbbells (though you can get by without those if you have to). If you’re new to strength training or haven’t done it in a while, start with a pair of 3-5lb. weights or whatever is comfortable for you.
			To start, do each of the following moves 8 to 12 times in a row. Move slowly and carefully, focusing all of your attention on what you’re doing. Stop if you feel pain or your muscles get so weak that you can’t continue.
			Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart. Keeping your legs straight, push up as far as you can on the balls of your feet. Pause for 2 seconds, then lower your heels back to the floor.
			Tip: Rest one or both hands on a wall or chair for balance.
			Too easy? Do the move while standing on the first step of a staircase. Start with your heels hanging just off the step, and rest a hand on the railing or wall to keep your balance.
			Stand in front of a wall, just a bit farther than arm’s length away. Then lean forward and place your palms flat against the wall, shoulder-height and shoulder-width apart. Bend your elbows as you slowly lower your upper body toward the wall while keeping your feet flat on the floor. Your back should be straight, and your stomach muscles tight. Pause, then push yourself back until your arms are straight again.
			Tip: Avoiding “locking” your elbows by keeping your arms slightly bent.
			Too easy? Make this move more challenging by using a countertop instead of a wall and scooting your feet back so that more of your weight is in your arms. Still too easy? Do a classic push-up on the floor.
			Grasp a dumbbell in each hand, place your feet shoulder-width apart, and let your arms hang by your sides, palms facing your thighs. As you slowly lift the weight, rotate your forearms so your palms end up facing your shoulders. Pause, and then lower the dumbbells back to starting position.
			Tip: Keep your wrists straight, and your upper arms and elbows close to your sides.
			Too easy? Use a heavier weight. You know you have the right weight when your muscles are tired after doing the move 10 times.
			Lie on your back, knees bent, feet flat on the floor. With your hands behind your head and elbows pointing out to the sides, slowly raise your shoulders and upper back off of the floor. Pause, then lower your shoulders back to the floor. Don’t forget to breathe! Exhale as you raise your shoulders, and inhale as you lower them.
			Tip: Despite the name, don't sit all the way up — raise only your shoulders and upper back. Keep your chin lifted off of your chest and avoid pulling on your head with your hands.
			Too easy? Do the same move with your feet lifted off the floor. Keep your knees bent so your calves are parallel to the floor and cross your ankles for stability.
			Lie face down on the floor and extend your arms straight over your head. Lift your left arm and your right leg up off of the floor at the same time, keeping your head, neck, and back in a line. Hold that position for 2 to 4 seconds before lowering your arm and leg back to the floor. Repeat with your right arm and left leg.
			Tip: Be sure your feet are flexed, not pointed.
			Too easy? Lift both arms and both legs up off of the floor at the same time. Hold this for 2 to 4 seconds, then lower.
			Grasp a dumbbell in each hand and sit or stand with your feet shoulder-width apart. Raise your hands, with your palms facing forward and your wrists straight until the dumbbells are level with your shoulders and parallel to the floor. Push the dumbbells up, over your head until your arms are fully extended. Pause. Slowly lower your hands back to starting position.
			Tip: Keep the dumbbells in line with your shoulders as you raise and lower them, and avoid “locking” your elbows.
			Too easy? Use a heavier weight—your muscles should be tired after doing the move 10 times.
			Stand about a foot and a half from a smooth wall, and then lean your back against it. Bend your knees to slide your back down the wall until your thighs are about parallel to the floor — or as close as you can get without straining yourself. Hold this position, keeping your stomach muscles tight. Slowly return to starting position by sliding your back up the wall.
			Tip: As you bend your legs, don’t let your knees extend past your toes. If you have to, scoot your feet forward to make sure that doesn’t happen.
			Too easy? Do it without the wall: Stand with feet slightly more than shoulder-width apart, arms extended forward and parallel to the floor. Keeping your weight in your heels, lean forward just a bit at your hips, and keep your back straight as you slowly lower yourself to a near-sitting position (or as far down as you can comfortably go). Pause, and then slowly rise to standing.
		Burning calories isn't just for workouts. Your goal is to move more all day long.
		To create a healthy lifestyle that will last long into your old age, it’s important to begin thinking of yourself as an “active person.” That means you’re someone who strives to be active all day long, not just when you strap on your sneakers for a workout.
		That might mean tackling household chores with more gusto, taking up a hobby that keeps you moving, power-walking while you browse a big-box store, or just joining in with your kids' active play time. Take a look at how all of the things you might do can add up in terms of calories burned.
		There are almost always ways to make a chore or hobby more active. The most obvious is to pick up the pace of whatever you're doing so that you start to break a sweat.
		Another great tip is to put more of your body into every move: Whether you're unloading groceries, vacuuming, moving boxes, or watching kids, squeeze your abs to strengthen your core, incorporate deep knee bends and biceps curls, and make a point of focusing on the muscles you're using as you use them. Every little effort counts!
		Injuries will be less likely as your strength and balance improve. But if the odd sprain or bruise crops up, here's how to handle it.
		Workout injuries usually happen when you're not focused on what you're doing (talking on your cell while riding your bike? Thinking about your grocery list in the middle of a yoga class?), or when you're trying to do too much, too soon.
		Slowly increasing the intensity and duration of your exercise sessions and avoiding distractions will help stop injuries from happening. On the off-chance you do suffer a bruise, strain, or sprain, it can be treated with a course of R.I.C.E.: rest, ice, compression, and elevation.
          Wrap ice or cold compression in an absorbent towel or cloth, and apply to the injured area. Ice reduces pain, bruising, and swelling.
          Apply pressure by wrapping the injury with an elastic bandage. The bandage helps to reduce swelling and promote healing.
          If possible, lift the injured area above your heart to reduce blood pressure to the area. Use a pillow to prop it up and keep yourself comfortable.
		Before we get off the topic of injuries, be aware that chest pain, nausea, shortness of breath, excessive sweating, and dizziness are all signs that it's time to stop exercising immediately and rest until the symptoms disappear. Sit or lie down until your discomfort subsides — only resume exercising if you feel perfectly well again, and be sure to start very slow.
		If you have chest pain that does not go away after a few minutes, call 911 or go to a hospital emergency room. Schedule an appointment with your doctor to discuss any of these symptoms, or an injury that you think may be serious.
    Which previous injuries or muscle / joint sensitivities might require you to take special precautions when exercising?
		Reluctant to join a workout community or having trouble finding one? These tips will help.
		In the previous lesson, we talked about the benefits of exercising with a partner or bigger group of people — it makes working out more fun, and increases the odds that you’ll stick to a regular schedule. But finding your “fitness tribe” can be easier said than done.
		If you’ve yet to find the right people to workout with, or are reluctant to start looking, these four tips might give you the nudge you need.
				When you’re working towards a common goal, everyone’s differences can become strengths as you share tips and strategies based on your unique experiences. It's a mistake to assume that a group isn't right for you because they come from different backgrounds or aren't in your age group. The real test is whether they are warm, positive, and welcoming to you. Try attending one class or meet-up before you decide.
					Skipping workouts is harder when someone else is watching.
				Having a fitness tribe means that there will be people who notice when you don’t show up, which makes you more likely to put in the extra effort to get there. Be sure to introduce yourself to your instructor and a few fellow classmates on day one, and continue to say hello at each class to build those relationships.
					Chit-chat is an underrated form of support.
				Talking with your exercise community is important for the same reasons you talk with your group in Prevent–support will keep you going. When you’re alone, it’s easy to give up on your workout. When you’re in a class, you can admit you’re not in the mood to workout, and a chorus of voices will come back at you with sympathetic encouragement.
					Having a good time should be one of your group’s top goals.
				Exercise should be something you look forward to, and the people you workout with can make all the difference. Even the most challenging (and probably your least favorite) parts of a workout are easier to weather when there are people around you who try to laugh and have fun, even when things get hard.
    Which classes or other group fitness activities in your area can you check out in the next few weeks?
		Mix up your activity options to banish boredom and turn exercise into an adventure.
		Doing the same familiar activities week after week (with a group or by yourself), has some definite advantages. Most importantly, it helps with habit-building—the more often you do something, the easier it gets, and the less you have to think about it.
		As you get in better shape, though, you might find that you’re growing bored with your regular routine and crave something a little — or a lot — different. What you can do will depend on your resources and where you live, but we encourage you to explore, keep an open mind, and at least try things once before ruling them out.
			In-Pool Power Walking Walking in water can be a pleasant yet challenging workout in pools that contain a special 'current channel.' In the channel, jets provide constant resistance, allowing you to walk in place or move forward with effort. Check in with university pools, community centers, or gyms to find out if there’s one near you.
			Local Intramural Leagues If being on a team motivates you, contact your local community or recreation center to find out about intramural leagues. You can play games like dodgeball, ultimate Frisbee, flag football, soccer, and softball with a whole crew behind you for support.
			Urban Walking Trails Hiking doesn’t have to happen in the woods. Most cities and some towns will have tourist walking routes. Pop into a visitors' center for suggestions and a map. The fun comes in discovering local landmarks, architecture, and history along the way.
			Community Walking ClubsHaven’t found a walking buddy yet? A walking club meets up at a specific time in a specific place and walks as a group. You get a workout plus an opportunity to chat with people you might never have met otherwise. Do an internet search for your town plus the words “walking club” and we’ll bet you’ll find one. If you don’t, consider starting one yourself via a site like meetups.com, or posting a sign at work or at your local library or rec center.
		If none of the above appeal to you, that's fine. There's a big fitness world out there, and the key is to just keep experimenting until you find something you enjoy.
		What are some physical activities that you have done once or twice and would like to do more often, or that you are curious to try for the first time?
		Physical activity is a powerful way to stay healthy, but it can't undo unhealthy food choices.
		Imagine you’ve just finished a brisk, 1-mile walk. You’re hungry, so you go for a snack. This is a crucial moment. After exercise, it’s easy to think that because you just burned off some calories, you can indulge in an unhealthy treat.
		Unfortunately, this logic doesn’t hold if you want to lose weight and improve your health. You are not becoming more active so that you can stick to unhealthy habits—you want to get in the habit of making positive choices all day long, no matter what you do.
		To make losing weight and improving your health easier, follow up your workouts with a piece of low-sugar fruit, or a small handful of nuts—and a big glass of water to keep you hydrated.
						Make time for two short muscle-strengthening workouts.
						Consider a new class or group activity that helps you work toward your weekly 150-minute cardio goal.
						Pick one chore and supercharge it!
					Weigh in daily.
					Contribute to the group discussion.
					Continue reporting your steps and activity.
					Use the Healthy Eating Plate guidelines to plan meals: Fill your plate with 1/2 veggies and 1/2 protein and healthy fats; snack on nuts, seeds, or low-sugar fruit; drink unsweetened beverages.
					If you find it helpful, keep tracking what you eat and drink.
    Energy can make or break your ability to reach your goals.
  Energy is your most precious resource—it takes a lot of energy to get up from that comfy couch and into your sneakers, to plan and prepare meals week after week, and to make new choices every day instead of falling back on old habits.
    Most people don’t realize how essential energy is to making healthy choices. Just like your body, your brain needs fuel to keep you on your game. In fact, when your brain lacks energy in the form of glucose, you’re more likely to make poor decisions. In a revealing study, researchers offered people the option of a little money tomorrow, or a lot of money at a later date. Individuals who had enough glucose in their bloodstream agreed to wait for the bigger payoff. Those with low glucose levels took the quick cash.
    The upshot: When you have to decide between instant gratification and doing what’s best for you in the long run, you want energy on your side.
    To stay energized, you need a relatively steady stream of glucose to your brain and body. In Prevent, we encourage you to eat a diet that provides exactly that. Regular meals and snacks — filled with non-starchy vegetables, low-sugar fruit, lean protein, and healthy fat — break down slowly into glucose, which keeps you well-fueled. In contrast, when you eat sugary, starchy foods, you get a big flood of glucose that subsides fast, and leaves you feeling low.
    Food has a major impact on your energy, but it's not the only factor that matters. Sleep is even more important. Let's step out of your kitchen, and talk about what's happening in your bedroom...
    How much you snooze impacts how much you lose.
    If you seldom clock 7 to 9 hours between the sheets, it could be affecting your weight. Being underslept knocks hunger hormones out of balance, sending you in search of food—junk food, that is. Studies suggest that a lack of sleep can spark specific cravings for carbs and other fattening treats.
    Sleeping more, on the other hand, can help you lose weight. One study compared people who slept about 5.5 hours each night with those who averaged 8.5. Even while following the same diet, the better sleepers lost more fat and were less hungry throughout the day.
    How do you spend more quality time with your pillow? If you exercise regularly, that may be helping. Research shows that people who exercise regularly fall asleep faster and sleep nearly 45 minutes longer each night than people with sedentary lifestyles.
        1. Kick your laptop out of bed. Working or browsing between the sheets causes you to associate your bed with something other than rest and relaxation, which is counter-productive. Your bed should be reserved for sleep, sex, and calming activities like light reading, stretching, and meditating.
        3. Create a sleep cave. Bears hibernate in dark, cool, quiet caves for a reason. These conditions are optimal for deep sleep. Banish light by turning off all screens and investing in dark curtains—or just wear a sleep mask. Drown out noises by running a white noise machine or fan. Finally, wear light clothing and keep the room temp under 72 degrees.
        Tweak Your Sleep Schedule.
        If you’re having a lot of trouble drifting off at night, the American Sleep Association recommends specific times each day when you should stop engaging in sleep-disrupting behaviors. Take a look at the graphic below. Suspect one of these behaviors is keeping you awake? Set a cut-off time, and stick to it for a week to see if it helps.
      How often do you wake up feeling rested? What could you change about your habits and environment to improve the quality of your sleep?
    When you work with your natural energy rhythm, everything feels easier.
    Are you a morning person, or a night owl? It may seem like a superficial question, but the answer matters. Research backs up the fact that some people naturally have more energy in the a.m., while others have more in the evening. For most people, the effect doesn’t create problems  — a night owl can drum up the energy to get to school or work on time, and a morning person can attend a late-night party without getting drowsy. But for 5% to 10% of people, the effect is more extreme. For these night owls it’s difficult to go to bed or wake up early. And extreme morning people find it hard to stay up or wake up late.
    Even if you’re not an extreme case, acknowledging that you’re a morning person or night owl can help you work with, instead of against, your natural energy rhythms. Planning to prepare food in the a.m., for example, may be a good strategy for a morning person, but could make it tough for a night owl to follow through. Scheduling priority tasks at high-energy times in your day will set you up for success.
      Did You Know?
        Your natural energy rhythm can shift as you get older. In one study, the majority of young adults turned out to be night owls, while most elderly individuals identified as morning people.
    Tapping into your natural energy is especially helpful when starting an exercise routine. Over time, exercise will likely become a source of energy for you. But, in the beginning, it takes a lot of effort. If you can, plan to exercise at the energy high-point of your day, or as close to it as you can get.
    Do you usually have more energy early or later in the day? Does your current exercise and meal-prep schedule take advantage of your natural energy rhythm?
    Back away from that candy bar. There are smarter ways to energize!
    Snacks — sugary, carb-heavy snacks in particular — are always a tempting solution when you're dragging. You may have a habit of grabbing a bag of a chips or cookies at the first sign of a slump. It doesn’t help that you've been exposed to countless ads for highly processed snacks and drinks that claim to give you 'wings' or provide '5 hours' of energy.
    If it's been a couple of hours since you've eaten, munching on something (something healthy, that is) may be the best way to get a boost. But if you're not due for a snack, there are other options to try first. Start by moving your body. Physical activity pushes nutrients and oxygen through your system, helping your heart and lungs work more efficiently, and making you feel more energized. As soon as a lull comes on, try a little activity before raiding your stash of snacks. After a quick walk, you may realize you don’t need to eat.
    Exercise isn't the only calorie-free energy booster. If you’re a social person, chat up a coworker or call a friend (but avoid venting about problems, which can lower energy). Has someone done something nice for you lately? Studies suggest that saying thank you can give you a lift. So can doing something to make someone else happy. Another option: laughter. No joke. Search for something funny online. Studies show that laughing can increase your heart rate from 10 to 20%.
    If you are due for a snack, avoid anything high in sugar or other refined carbs, which will prompt a bigger crash later. A handful of nuts or seeds, or a piece of low-sugar fruit are your best options, but certainly not your only options. Here are some easy, tasty snacks that are great for you.
    Turn energy drains into energy gains by tweaking these behaviors.
          While coffee can be part of a healthy diet, too much can put you on an energy rollercoaster: A big jolt of caffeine is often followed by the blahs. Try taking a brisk walk at the exact times you usually have your java. Note how you feel after your stroll and decide if you can do without the caffeine.
            This week, place healthy, energy-boosting snacks in plain sight. This could mean filling a basket with low-sugar fruit in your kitchen or a jar with nuts and seeds on your desk — whatever will help you reach for healthy foods instead of unhealthy ones. If fresh whole foods are the foods you see first, they’re the ones you’ll grab in a pinch.
            Think of the couch and desk chair as your enemies. Sitting not only saps your energy, research shows that the more you sit, the higher your risk for chronic diseases like diabetes, cancer, and heart disease. If your job requires a lot of sitting, it can be tough to avoid. At the very least, set an alarm or use software like Time Out or Workrave to remind you to stand up every 20 minutes.
            Next time you’re beginning to drag, get up and refill your water bottle. Research shows that too little water can affect your mood, concentration, and energy levels. Be sure to drink water throughout the day, setting a timer if you need a reminder.
    Which of the above habit swaps could make a difference for you and why?
    The only thing to do when you’re really dragging: Go easy on yourself.
    No matter how many smart strategies you use to stay fueled, there will always be days when can’t seem to shift out of first gear. Even though you know doing your scheduled workout would perk you up, you just can’t motivate to make it happen. All the healthy ingredients to a balanced meal may be in your fridge, but the thought of cooking is just too exhausting.
    When that happens, it’s important to conserve what energy you do have. That means canceling plans that aren’t crucial, putting aside chores and errands that can be handled later, and giving yourself permission to slow down.
    Focus on healthy goals that take minimal effort. If you can’t do a full workout, go for a brief, gentle stroll. If you’re going to order in from a restaurant instead of cook, scan the menu for an option with lots of veggies and healthy protein. These small, positive actions will keep your get-healthy momentum going.
    We also encourage you to share how you’re feeling on your group discussion board. You’ll probably get some moral support or just a reassuring “me too.” Then get a good night’s rest, and start fresh tomorrow!
          Consider your current sleep habits and make changes that will help you get more rest.
          Think about your daily energy highs and lows. Schedule challenging tasks at high-energy times in your day.
          Swap an energy-draining habit with one that boosts your energy.
          On your lowest days, aim for easy health goals to keep your momentum going.
          Weigh in daily.
          Contribute to the group discussion.
          Continue planning for 150 minutes of cardio, work your muscles twice this week, and do your best to meet your personal step goal.
          Use the Healthy Eating Plate to plan meals and snacks.
    You've Come a Long Way!
    Learn the trick to transforming a habit from the inside out.
      Drinking a soda, eating until you're stuffed, sitting down all day... You might think you need to break habits like these. Surprisingly, that's not true. Psychologists who study behavior change have found that transforming a habit — changing an unhealthy habit into a healthy one — is both easier and more effective. In order to transform a habit, you need to know how they work.
      Habits have 3 parts: a reminder, a routine, and a reward. Together, they form a “habit loop.” Let’s say you have a nightly habit of eating chips while watching TV. The reminder for this habit is probably turning on the TV. The routine is grabbing a bag of chips and sitting on the couch. The reward isn’t just the pleasure of crunching on salty, fatty chips — it’s the feeling that, at the end of the day, ahhh… you’re finally relaxing.
      When you engage in an unhealthy activity for the first time, you don't intend to make it a habit. But then you do it again and again. That’s when your brain takes notice. Researchers believe that habit loops form when your brain registers the link between a reminder, routine, and reward, and stores that information. Your brain loves to store habits because they help it multitask. You know how you can brush your teeth, or drive, or do chores while thinking about something else? Those are habit loops in action. Habits allow you to mindlessly repeat familiar behaviors so that you (and your brain) can focus on other things.
      There’s one more element of a habit loop that you need to know about: a craving. When your brain picks up on a reminder (the TV is on!), it triggers a craving for the reward (ahhh, relaxation). That craving compels you to follow through with your usual routine (open a bag of chips, sit down, and start crunching), so you can score your reward.
      In this lesson, we’ll take you through the process of tackling your stickiest unhealthy habits, and transforming them from the inside out.
    Part of what makes habits hard to change is that two parts of the habit loop — the reminder and the reward — are tough to control. Take our example of snacking while watching TV. You could try to eliminate the reminder by never turning on your TV at night. That might work… for a little while. But you can’t avoid TV forever. Plus, watching TV is fun, and you shouldn’t have to give it up.
    Rewards are even harder to eliminate than cues. It would take a lot of effort to convince yourself that relaxing at the end of a long day doesn't feel good.
    Since we often can't alter the reminder or the reward, the most effective strategy for transforming a habit is to switch the routine. If the reminder is turning on the TV, and the reward is relaxation, you have to find a healthier replacement for eating chips. You have to ask yourself: What other activities would relax you while you watch TV? Maybe you could buy a massage tool and use it to release muscle tension, sip an aromatic herbal tea, or soak your tired feet in a tub of warm water.
    The switch will only work if your new routine successfully satisfies the craving at the heart of that habit. If soaking your feet, sipping tea, or a self-massage fails to relax you at the end of the day, you’ll fall back on your chip-eating habit.
    Zoom in on the habit “reminders” hiding all around you.
          Places - Familiar locations are hotbeds for habit reminders. A coffee shop may cue you to order a sugary drink, being in the office kitchen might send you in search of donuts, or a trip through the mall may prompt you to buy a frosted cinnamon bun. Avoiding location-based reminders seldom works. You’re bound to find yourself in these places again. It’s better to brainstorm new routines that deliver the reward you crave.
          Events -  From birthdays to group dinners to date nights, events are full of reminders that cue us to crave sugar and other comfort foods. Consider the events that come up often in your life that lead to unhealthy choices. You may find that it helps to examine the rewards you're craving at these events. Often, the true rewards aren't food — they're fun, friendship, romance, or a sense of belonging.
          People -  The friend who encourages you to indulge, the spouse who likes to cuddle on the couch, the relative who cooks comfort food, you probably do certain things when you’re around certain people. As you examine your habits, make a mental list (or a real one) of the people you see often, and around whom you tend to make poor decisions. See if you can identify a clear habit loop triggered by each person’s company.
  Other external reminders include time, smells, sounds, even colors. A reminder might be a combination of factors: a time and place (a coffee shop in the morning), an event and a person (a party with a food-loving friend), colors and smells (a red-and-yellow sign and the smell of a hamburger), etc. As you identify reminders, keep an open mind, and consider all of the possibilities.
    Lay out a step-by-step plan to address your most stubborn habits.
    We hope this lesson has prompted you to think about the habits that are getting in the way of your health goals. Choose one of those habits to focus on now, and break it down. First, note the repetitive, unhealthy behavior — eating a fast food lunch with coworkers, for example. That’s your routine. Then pinpoint the reminder for that routine. Maybe it's when everyone breaks for lunch. Next, identify the reward that you’re craving. Beyond food, it could be to connect with your coworkers and feel like you're part of the team.
      You don’t have to brainstorm new routines alone. Ask your coach and/or your group for suggestions. Then make a plan to try one out. If it doesn’t work, try another. When you find one that works, stick with it! Repeat the healthy routine every time you experience your usual reminder. Before long, engaging in the healthy routine will feel automatic.
     Do you think habit transformation could work for you? How might you use this technique to change an unhealthy habit?
    It’s natural to want to do what’s easy. Use that to your advantage.
             From making a grocery list to picking workout times, healthy living takes planning. Keep your planning tools — a pen and notepad, your calendar, schedules for fitness classes, low-carb cookbooks, take-out menus from healthy restaurants — on hand and in plain sight. At the same time, toss junk food menus and give away cookbooks that highlight sugar and other refined carbs.
             Plans to eat well and exercise will fall through fast if it’s hard to find what you need. Healthy food should be in sight on your kitchen counter and in your fridge and cabinets. Pack your shelves with food containers that are just the right sizes for your meals and snacks. And make sure you have more than enough workout clothes ready to be tossed in your gym bag and placed by the door.
             You have meaningful reasons for wanting to live a healthy life. Keep them in mind at all times, by writing them down on paper and posting notes in your house, car, workplace, and/or wallet. You might also hang up images, event notices, or brochures that remind you of long-term goals, like walking a 5K or going on an active vacation.
          Junk food has a way of getting into your house whether you like it or not — friends arrive with cookies, family members bring home leftovers. How do you try to keep unhealthy temptations out of your home? And what do you do when you can’t?
  You've Come a Long Way!
    Reflect on the past eight weeks, and renew your commitment to better health.
    Eight weeks ago, you took the first step toward living a healthier life by signing up for this program. Are you on your way to your initial weight-loss goal of 7%? If so, you're doing especially well. Focus on keeping your momentum and setting new goals. If you haven't reached 7%, that's normal. This is the perfect point to dig deep and go after that goal. Reach out to your group, use your food and activity trackers, step on your scale every day, and identify some specific habits that you want to transform.
      This week, we ask that everyone schedule a one-on-one phone call with their health coach. Whether you’ve been in regular contact with your coach or haven’t connected in a while, this is an opportunity to review your current goals and talk about your needs right now. Which food issues are you still struggling with? Have you been able to start an activity routine that feels right for you? How well are you sleeping and managing stress? You might want to prepare a list of topics or questions to address with your coach.
    What Happens After 16 Weeks?
    As you know, Prevent isn't a quick fix. It's designed to be an ongoing resource for you, helping you to live a healthy life for the long-term. The first 16 weeks of the program are the most intensive. Your coach is here as your daily guide, and you have the support of your close-knit group. After 16 weeks, you will have the opportunity to move on to a part of the program called Sustain. In Sustain, you can set new health goals, continue using your food and activity trackers, and connect with a larger number of Prevent participants. There will be more to learn, and more to do. You  have a lot to look forward to!
          Select one or more habits you want to transform. Test out new routines.
          Schedule a call with your health coach  this week.
          Weigh in daily.
          Plan for 150 minutes of physical activity, and make time for 2 muscle-strengthening workouts.
          Use the Healthy Eating Plate to plan meals and snacks.
          Contribute to the group discussion.
    Learning how to make healthy choices in the face of any challenge is key to lasting lifestyle change.
    Overhauling your lifestyle is no easy feat. From purging your kitchen of nutrient-void junk food, to troubleshooting your sleep routine, each little change adds up to an enormous amount of effort. And, even if you're 100% up to the challenge, situations that trip you up are sure to arise. That’s just life. Obstacles of all kinds — job pressures, family stress, overpacked calendars, even injuries — can sneak up on you and make it easy to slide back into the unhealthy habits you started with. Instead of allowing that to happen, let’s put a plan in place now that lays out exactly how you’ll handle (almost) any type of problem.
      Did You Know?
        Did you know? A 2010 study of obese women showed that problem-solving techniques help with weight loss. Participants who lost 10% or more of their body weight during the trial study had better proven problem-solving skills than those who lost less weight.
    For starters, we're going to teach you how to break a problem down into manageable pieces. Use this simple five-step strategy to take control of any unexpected situation.
             Your problem could be any thought, feeling, action, or interaction that is getting in the way of your making healthy choices. Grab a pen and a piece of paper, and describe it in writing. Be detailed. Be specific. Now think about what led to it. Your goal is to uncover the chain of actions or behaviors that preceded the problem. If it helps, try asking yourself "why?" a minimum of five times. Be honest when answering, and include as many details as you can.
            For example, imagine that you stopped for fast food on the way home from work and stuffed yourself with something packed with refined carbs. Why did you opt for fast food? Because you were starving and had no energy to cook. Why were you so hungry and low on energy? Because you skipped lunch. Why did you skip lunch? Because you forgot to bring something from home and the cafeteria was so crowded it would have taken forever to get food. Why didn't you bring something from home? Because you woke up late and had to rush out of the house.
            When you describe the day in detail this way, the chain of events that led to the unhealthy decision becomes clear.
          Now, using the details from your description in step one, brainstorm ideas for addressing each link in the chain of events that led to your problem. Pair each piece of the problem with its own list of possible solutions. Let your ideas flow and write each down. At this point, anything goes. The more ideas you list, the better. Sometimes the most unusual thoughts can lead to great solutions. Take time to think through this step and make sure you have a long list of possible solutions before moving on.
          Going back to our fast food example, your list of options might include hunting down a few more healthy lunch spots near work for those days when the cafeteria is slammed. You might set your alarm earlier so that you always have time to prep lunch in the morning. You could stash some satisfying snacks in your desk, or cook big batches of soup on the weekend so that you always have something to reheat when you get home, etc. You get the idea.
          Once you list all of the solutions you can think of, weigh the pros and cons of each, and choose the most doable solution. Don't kid yourself — nix any options that don't seem realistic. If you know that you're a snooze button addict, don't bother trying to set your alarm earlier. If the neighborhood where you work is a food desert, finding healthy takeout spots is a lost cause. While you’re at it, remember that you’re not just solving one problem; you’re trying to break a chain of events that led to a problem. If you apply your solution to an early link in the chain, it may make it easier to avoid the scenario that triggered your unhealthy choice.
          Once you choose a solution you'd like to try, plan out what needs to be done, when, and how you will prepare. Consider any roadblocks you may meet while carrying out your solution, and think about how you can set yourself up for success. For example, if cooking a big batch of food on the weekends is appealing to you, you might schedule a weekly grocery shopping trip on Saturday, buy a bunch of microwave-safe containers to store individual portions, and build in accountability by asking a friend to come over on Sundays to help. Do whatever you can to increase your chances of success.
        Here's where the rubber meets the road: Find out what happens when you try to follow through on your plan.
          Once you attempt to carry out the plan, you can reflect on the process and whether or not it worked. If it didn't work as well as you’d hoped, try not to get discouraged. Instead, use what you learned from the problem-solving process to create a new action plan. Being willing to let go of your original plan and come up with another one can be tough, but it's also the secret to success. Go back to your list from step 2, and choose a different solution to try. It may take some trial and error, but don’t give up. Problem-solving is a process and the only way to find a solution is to stay positive and determined.
          Think about an unhealthy habit that you have changed since starting Prevent. Maybe it had something to do with grocery shopping or social cues... What was the problem, and how did you solve it?
    Figuring out how to work around — or blast through — obstacles takes creativity. Here's how to spark ideas on even the dullest days.
    You now know how to examine a problem and reveal the chain of events leading up to it, but finding the winning solution hinges on being able to come up with several possible plans of attack. When you get stuck, try one or more of these proven ways to boost creativity. Then sit back and wait for the answers to come to you.
          As soon as your creative well runs dry, try taking a quick walk and then coming back to the problem. Research shows people who exercise regularly (like you!) can stimulate more “flexible thinking” by getting their blood pumping a bit. A great solution might surface in the middle of your walk or soon after.
          A 2013 study found people who went out for lunch with a group of friends came back in a state of mind ripe for creative thinking. So if you're hammering away at a problem and think taking a break to socialize would be a waste of time, think again.
           Research shows if you need help coming up with more potential solutions to a problem, taking a few minutes to practice “open awareness” meditation may help. There are many types of meditation. In this one, you attempt to clear your mind and simply become more aware of the sights, sounds, and smells around you. The great thing about this type of meditation is you can do it anywhere — at your desk, on the bus, in bed, on your couch, on a walk. Give it a try.
            Thinking through how you can avoid a particular pitfall? Try turning off your overhead lights. A 2013 study found people feel freer and less inhibited under less intense lighting, and so tend to generate more creative ideas.
      Once you've tried these methods and benefited from the bump in creativity, you'll realize that there's almost always a different way to tackle a tough problem. Let that knowledge fuel your determination to overcome any and all challenges to living a healthy life.
    Your Prevent group can be an amazing source of healthy solutions you may not have thought of.
    Each week, everyone on your Prevent team is taking steps and overcoming barriers to being active and eating healthy. So, when it comes to understanding the challenges you're facing and suggesting possible solutions, who better to turn to?
      Did You Know?
        In one weight-loss study, a group of participants who had social support in addition to standard behavioral treatment had a 95% completion rate, with 66% of the group maintaining weight loss. A similar group of participants who received no social support had just a 74% completion rate, and only 24% of them maintained weight loss.
    You were matched with the other members of your Prevent group because you share certain things in common. That raises the odds that they are experiencing obstacles similar to your own. But, even if all of the members of your group are leading very different lives, they can still help you problem-solve. Group brainstorming is a powerful way to reveal more solutions than you could easily conceive of on your own. In fact, social support can be the most important factor for many people striving for weight loss and lifestyle changes. So be sure to share your personal experiences — both good and bad — with your group, and encourage others to share theirs as well. By communicating often and combining efforts to deal with difficult issues, you'll be more successful than if you try and do everything on your own.
        Choose a problem you are grappling with right now and share it with your team. What solutions have you already tried? What roadblocks have you hit?
    This response will be shared on your group discussion board when you finish this lesson.
          Reflect on your progress and personal challenges with your health coach and group. Celebrate and set new goals.
          Weigh in daily.
          Contribute to the group discussion.
          Continue planning for 150 minutes of cardio, work your muscles twice this week, and do your best to meet your personal step goal.
          Use the Healthy Eating Plate to plan meals and snacks.

